Introduction to Kinesiology Studying Physical Activity 

SIXTH EDITION 

Duane V. Knudson, PhD 
TEXAS STATE UNIVERSITY 

Timothy A. Brusseau, PhD 
UNIVERSITY OF UTAH 

HUMAN KINETICS 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Names: Knudson, Duane V., 1961- editor. | Brusseau, Timothy A., Jr. editor. 
Title: Introduction to kinesiology : studying physical activity / Duane V. 
Knudson, Timothy A. Brusseau, editors. 

Description: Sixth edition. |Champaign, IL : Human Kinetics, [2022] | 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 

Preface vii 

Acknowledgments ix 

PART | Kinesiology and Physical Activity Experience 

1 Introduction to Kinesiology 3 
Duane V. Knudson and Timothy A. Brusseau 

Interest in the Discipline of Kinesiology 5 + Physical Activity: The Focus of Kinesiology 6 - Some 
Focuses of Physical Activity in Kinesiology 10 - Kinesiology and Evidence-Based 
Practice 17 + Wrap-Up 19 

2 Importance of the Physical Activity Experience 21 
Timothy A. Brusseau and Duane V. Knudson 

Sphere of Self-Sufficiency 24 + Sphere of Self-Expression 25 + Sphere of Work 25 + Sphere 
of Education 28 - Sphere of Leisure 30 - Sphere of Health 30 - Sphere of 
Competition 32 + Factors That Influence Kinds of Experience in Physical Activity 32 - Ways in 
Which Experience Can Affect Physical Activity 37 + Heredity and Experience 42 + Subjective 
Experience of Physical Activity 42 - Wrap-Up 44 

PART II Scholarly Study of Physical Activity 

3 Philosophy of Physical Activity 49 
Cesar R. Torres and Scott Kretchmar 
Why Use Philosophical Thinking? 51 - What Do Philosophers Do? 53 - Research Methods 
for Philosophy of Physical Activity 56 - History and Future of Philosophy of Physical 
Activity 59 + Overview of Knowledge in Philosophy of Physical Activity 60 + Wrap-Up 74 

4 History of Physical Activity 77 
Lindsay Parks Pieper 

Why Use History of Physical Activity? 78 + What Do Historians of Physical Activity 
Do? 81 - History of Kinesiology and Physical Activity 83 +» Research Methods for History of 
Physical Activity 85 - Overview of Knowledge in History of Physical Activity 88 - Wrap-Up 109 



Contents 

5 Sociology of Physical Activity 111 
Katherine M. Jamieson 

Why Use Sociology of Physical Activity? 113 + What Do Sociologists of Physical Activity 

Do? 117 - History of Sociology of Physical Activity 118 + Research Methods for Sociology of 

Physical Activity 120 - Overview of Knowledge in Sociology of Physical Activity 122 - Wrap- 

Up 140 

6 Motor Behavior 143 
Katherine T. Thomas, Xiangli Gu, and Jerry R. Thomas 

Why Use Motor Behavior? 144 + What Do Motor Behaviorists Do? 147 - History of Motor 
Behavior 148 - Research Methods for Motor Behavior 150 + Overview of Knowledge in Motor 
Behavior 155 + Wrap-Up 168 

7 Sport and Exercise Psychology 171 
Robin S. Vealey 
Why Use Sport and Exercise Psychology? 173 + What Do Sport and Exercise Psychology 
Professionals Do? 173 + History of Sport and Exercise Psychology 175 - Research Methods 
for Sport and Exercise Psychology 177 + Overview of Knowledge in Sport and Exercise 
Psychology 180 + Wrap-Up 195 

8 Biomechanics of Physical Activity 197 
Kathy Simpson 

Why Use Biomechanics of Physical Activity? 198 -» What Do Biomechanists Do? 202 - History 
of Biomechanics 203 + Research Methods for Biomechanics 206 - Overview of Knowledge in 
Biomechanics 210 + Wrap-Up 215 

9 Physiology of Physical Activity 217 
Jennifer L. Caputo 

Why Use Physiology of Physical Activity? 219 - What Do Exercise Physiologists 
Do? 222 - History of Physiology of Physical Activity 222 - Research Methods for Physiology 
of Physical Activity 224 + Overview of Knowledge in Physiology of Physical Activity 227 + Wrap- 
Up 239 

PART Ill Practicing a Profession in Physical Activity 

10 Becoming a Physical Activity Professional 243 
Duane V. Knudson and Timothy A. Brusseau 

What Is a Profession? 245 + How Do Our Values Shape Our Professional Conduct? 255 - How 
Are Physical Activity Professionals Educated for the Workforce? 257 + Are You Suited for a Career 
in the Physical Activity Professions? 264 + Wrap-Up 270 



Contents vi 

11 Careers in Health and Fitness 273 
Warren D. Franke 

The Need for Health and Fitness Professionals 275 + Settings for Health and 
Fitness 276 - Roles for Health and Fitness Professionals 284 + Trends and Opportunities in 
Health and Fitness 296 - Advice for Health and Fitness Students 302 - Wrap-Up 303 

12 Careers in Medicine and Allied Health 305 
Chad Starkey 

The Diagnostic Process 307 + Integrating Exercise Into Medicine and Allied 
Health 307 + Medical and Allied Health Settings 315 + Roles for Medical and Allied Health 
Professionals 317 + Trends and Opportunities in Medicine and Allied Health 329 - Advice for 
Students Interested in Medicine and Allied Health 330 + Wrap-Up 331 

13 Careers in Teaching Physical Education 333 
Kim C. Graber and Thomas J. Templin 

What Is the Teaching of Physical Education? 336 + Settings for Teaching Physical 
Education 348 - Roles for Physical Education Professionals 351 + Trends and Opportunities in 
Teaching Physical Education 359 + Advice for Physical Education Students 360 - Wrap-Up 361 

14 Careers in Coaching and Sport Instruction 363 
Joseph A. Luxbacher and Duane V. Knudson 

What Are Coaching and Sport Instruction? 365 + Settings for Coaching and Sport 
Instruction 368 - Roles for Coaching and Sport Instruction Professionals 374 + Trends and 
Opportunities in Coaching and Sport Instruction 389 + Advice for Coaching and Sport Instruction 
Students 389 + Wrap-Up 391 

15 Careers in Sport Management 393 
G. Clayton Stoldt and Mark C. Vermillion 
What Is Sport Management? 394 - Settings for Sport Management 397 - Roles for Sport 
Management Professionals 401 + Trends and Opportunities in Sport Management 410 - Advice 
for Sport Management Students 411 - Wrap-Up 414 

Glossary 417 

References 425 

Index 449 

About the Editors 463 

About the Contributors 465 



Saw (0 Aare 

@ “it: iP > 

: aeDe  Siti Gop 

ws ary. 2) ewes 

|. > 
y * 

ee . 
— -_ = 

- — 

tae noltsyitent jetd Gee gottaef nre)el  
= ~ 

me <2 a ee | 
[shades 

{ rim > - 

7 SS 

wt qeh* ¢ ; sy OTE eg 2) Ae 

ot Ded 1.2 TOSS @ ft ) fe. ? s(@>ex 

A ee ; i hea 



Welcome to the sixth edition of Introduction to Kine- stand why the subdiscipline is important and how 
siology. Let us introduce you to the goals, organiza- it may relate to a variety of professional endeavors. 
tion, updates, and features of this new edition. The Part HI presents characteristics of professionals, 
new edition includes updated content, new features, followed by a look at professional opportunities in 
coverage of additional career opportunities from five major career areas: health and fitness, thera- 
established and new contributors, and a new editor. peutic exercise, physical education, coaching and 
We are pleased to present a fresh, comprehensive, and sport instruction, and sport management. 
yet concise introduction to the exciting and diverse 
discipline of kinesiology and the professions it serves. Updates in the Sixth Edition 

Goals of the Book The editors and contributors to this sixth edition 
have built on the strong foundation of the previ- 

The primary goals of Introduction to Kinesiology ous edition by listening to helpful feedback from 
are to give students a comprehensive overview of instructors while determining how to update the 
the discipline and to inspire them to pursue a major content and adapt the features of the book and its 
professional career related to it. In order to accurately ancillaries. We have striven to keep the new edition 
summarize the diverse and growing discipline of from getting longer, so new content has been added 
kinesiology, we use a unique model that addresses by phasing out less current material and examples. 
both the sources of knowledge and the primary Each chapter includes the latest research and 
subdisciplinary fields of this area of study. The last updated data (including over 240 new or updated 
six chapters highlight characteristics of professionals references) from the latest subdisciplinary and pro- 
and several professional careers that are open to fessional sources. For example, this edition addresses 
kinesiology graduates. We hope this book inspires both the recent expansion of kinesiology opportu- 
you to seriously and continuously study physical nities in analytics and public health and the current 
activity and to join us in a kinesiology career that pro- changes in allied health careers. In addition, the mul- 
motes physical activity for the benefit of all people. tiple sources of kinesiology knowledge emphasized 

in previous editions of the book have been supple- 

Organization mented in this revision to illustrate evidence-based 
practice and different styles of scholarship and 

The sixth edition retains the three-part structure reporting across subdisciplines and professions. The 
that addresses the sources of kinesiology knowl- Professional Issues in Kinesiology feature highlights 
edge, the primary subdisciplines of kinesiology, how knowledge presented in the chapter enables pro- 
and the major career areas for kinesiology gradu- fessionals to provide effective service to clients while 
ates. Part I has two chapters. Chapter 1 provides an following ethical requirements to act with equality, 
overview of the book, offers key definitions, and evidence-based practice, and expertise. The Kinesi- 
presents the model on which the text is organized. ology Colleagues feature provides engaging stories 
Chapter 2 introduces the diverse spheres of phys- about real-world professionals and how their careers 
ical activity experiences and their importance in have been influenced by their mastery of kinesiology. 
our experiential knowledge about physical activity. 

Part II reviews seven of the most common Features of the Book 
subdisciplines of kinesiology: philosophy, history, 
sociology, motor behavior, psychology, biomechanics, Readers will find key points, engaging sidebars, fig- 
and physiology. Each chapter gives an overview of ures, and photos that contribute to an enjoyable read- 

major historical milestones in the development of the ing experience. Each chapter begins with objectives 
subdiscipline; the research methods used in the sub- and an opening scenario that combine to provide a 

discipline; what researchers and professionals such road map for the content. Take time to read the many 

as biomechanists, exercise physiologists, and others sidebars sprinkled throughout the text. These features 

do in the course of their work; and how students’ will stimulate your thinking and reinforce what you 

current knowledge can provide a foundation for more have learned from the previous paragraphs. Don’t 

advanced study. Each of these chapters also presents miss the unique opportunity they offer for learning! 

practical, real-world applications from the relevant The sixth edition of Introduction to Kinesiology 

subdiscipline and is organized to help readers under- provides three new features to stimulate student 



me viii Preface 

interest. The subdisciplinary chapters each has one in HKPropel expose you to actual research 

or two of these features to introduce students to studies that contribute to the body of knowl- 

essential knowledge about kinesiology or its appli- edge in kinesiology and guide professionals 

cation. The Research and Evidence-Based Practice in their everyday practice. 

in Kinesiology boxes highlight how recent research * Practical Plug-Ins present you with a prob- 
provides critical evidence to make effective physical lem or challenge faced by a practicing 
activity recommendations to clients. Subdisciplinary professional. You'll consider how the pro- 
Highlight boxes showcase how exciting new discov- fessional might handle the situation, then 
eries can advance knowledge or professional appli- examine how he or she actually resolved 
cation. In the career chapters, the new Hot Career it. Allow time to use these lessons as you 
Opportunity features showcase some of the career go through the course and when you face 
options open to current kinesiology graduates. similar situations or challenges in the field. 

Students should especially take note of the Key 
Point summaries in every chapter. These points Instructor Resources 
highlight the most important points made in the 
preceding pages. Read each Key Point carefully, and In this sixth edition, Introduction to Kinesiology is 
reflect on what you have read. Similarly, when you again supported by a complete set of ancillaries: 
reach the end of a chapter, a set of Review Questions presentation package, image bank, instructor guide, 
will direct you to the most important concepts. test package, and chapter quizzes. 

* The presentation package provides more 

HKPropel Access £§HKPropel >) than 340 PowerPoint slides with selected 
illustrations and tables from the text. 

Another powerful resource is HKPropel. For students, 
¢ The image bank contains all of the figures, 

the online activities are essential to developing full 
tables, and content photos. You can use 

understanding of course content and contributing to 
these images to supplement lecture slides, 

online or in-person class discussions. For instructors, 
create handouts, or develop your own pre- 

HKPrope/ allows you to assign activities and track 
sentations and teaching materials. 

students’ progress and their comprehension of the 
material so that they are better prepared for exams ¢ The instructor guide contains information 

and for further study. The online activities provide a about how to use the various ancillaries; a 

variety of interactive, multimedia experiences to help syllabus; and chapter-by-chapter files that 

students learn, understand, and apply the information include chapter outlines with key points, addi- 

presented in the text. tional student assignments, ideas for additional 
teaching topics and guest speakers, resources, 

e Many activities use a variety of approaches— 
and answers to the in-text review questions. 

audio, video, drag-and-drop activities, 
self-ratings, interviews, and more—to ¢ The test package contains a bank of more than 

demonstrate various aspects of kinesiology 320 questions in true-or-false, multiple-choice, 

and bring the content alive. fill-in-the-blank, and essay format. The files 
may be downloaded for integration with a 

¢ Sometimes you'll be asked to search the web 
learning management system or printed as 

for specific information and then complete 
paper-based tests. Instructors may also create 

an associated activity that connects your 
their own customized quizzes or tests from 

online experience with what you’ve learned 
the test bank questions to assign to students 

in the book. 
directly through HKPropel. Multiple-choice 

* Key points activities in each chapter test how and true-or-false questions are automatically 
well you understand the material. You can graded, and student scores can be easily 
also print out the key points as a study aid. reviewed by instructors in the platform. 

¢ After reading the Kinesiology Colleagues * Ready-made chapter quizzes allow instruc- 
profile in the chapter, you can complete an tors to assess student comprehension of the 
associated online activity to reflect on your own most important concepts in each chapter. 
professional development with a short written Each quiz contains 10 or more questions. 
response or contribution to a discussion forum. Each quiz may be downloaded or assigned 

¢ Understanding how to read and evaluate to students within HKPropel. The chapter 
research will be critical as you continue your quizzes are automatically graded with scores 
studies in kinesiology. Working in tandem available for review in the platform. 
with the Professional Issues in Kinesiology All of these instructor ancillaries are available in 
sidebars in the book, the activities found the HKPropel instructor collection. 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

A project of this sort is the work of many accom- At the risk of inadvertently omitting a name or 
plished professionals, and we have been gratified two, we would like to give special acknowledg- 
to play a central role in leading this outstanding ment to those who made key contributions in the 
team. We were fortunate to work with respected production of Introduction to Kinesiology. Our 
kinesiology scholars who contributed engaging co-contributors caught the spirit of the project, 
chapters. Their work on this sixth edition was sensed its importance, and produced cutting-edge, 
also enhanced by the highly skilled and thorough highly readable, and informative chapters. Special 
professionals at Human Kinetics. credit goes to Janet Harris and Shirl Hoffman, who 

Although this book features the work of many shared editorial duties for early editions and whose 
authors, it isn’t an anthology or a compilation: It is a work continues to influence the book. The time 
textbook in every sense of the word. It is organized the editors spent to guide this project would not 
around a central theme, structured to accomplish be possible without the support of our colleagues, 
specific purposes for kinesiology majors, and families, and especially our dear wives, Lois Knud- 
integrated in terms, concepts, objectives, and fea- son and Megan Brusseau. 
tures. Each author brings to the project a unique Only those who have been fortunate enough 
professional and academic background and a track to author books published by Human Kinetics 
record of achievement in his or her respective can appreciate the talents of its publication teams. 
specializations, adding to the richness and breadth Those specifically involved with this book are 
of coverage that have been largely responsible for listed on the copyright page, and each did his or 
the book’s success. Achieving consistency and flow her work superbly. 
while explaining kinesiology concepts from diverse 
perspectives hasn’t been easy for the authors, the 
editors, or the editorial staff at Human Kinetics. 

ae 2 Part | 

televised games, put on shirts, jerseys, hats, and paint our faces to watch our favorite teams—all 

while putting off other things in life. 
Nor, despite years of thinking and research, have we determined precisely why some of us 

become so hooked on exercising, dance, recreational activities, or participating in sport that we 

prioritize it in our lives. The avid golfer who sneaks off to the course for a “quick 9 holes”; the 

dedicated tennis player who fills up every weekend with matches and tournaments; and the runner 

who seems unable to stop herself from running in the rain, the snow, or the unbearable heat—all 

are propelled by motivation and passion that is not easy to explain. A former editor of Runner's 

World, trying to understand his attraction to running, put it this way: “| write because the thoughts 
inside have to be put in more visible form. | run because it’s inside pushing to get out” (Sheehan, 
1978, p. 74). This passion for physical activity is the impetus for worldwide human interest in 
kinesiology—the academic study of physical activity. 

Physical activity experience is so prevalent in our lives that we tend to take it for granted. Yet it 
provides the foundation for the study of kinesiology. In chapter 1 we introduce you to the exciting 
discipline of kinesiology, define its focus on physical activity, and introduce its study from three 
perspectives or sources of knowledge: physical activity experience, scholarship of physical activity, 
and professional experience in physical activity. Chapter 2 focuses on helping you to appreciate 
the variety of the spheres of physical activity, their influence on humanity, and the importance of 
knowledge gained through the experience of physical activity. 

Introduction to Kinesiology 


The esports business is booming. Although some people have difficulty seeing computer 
gamers as athletes pursuing a sport, their activities require considerable mental and physical 

skill, as well as strategy, and in some cases teamwork—for example, when a group competes with 

another team in, say, Overwatch or League of Legends. From this perspective, computer gaming 

constitutes a sport. Even though it does not involve much whole-body movement or energy expen- 

diture, it does involve physical activity through the use of fast perceptual and fine motor skills. As 

a result, it may also apply to the use of other kinds of computer-controlled systems, such as those 
found in construction, materials handling, and national defense settings. Do 
you think virtual reality, esports, 
and fantasy sports will ever be 
as popular and respected as tra- 
ditional real-world sports? 

The wide variety of expressions 
of physical activity means that 
many career opportunities exist 
for kinesiology professionals, 
and many research opportunities 
exist for kinesiology scholars. The 
scholarly discipline of kinesiology 
focuses on creating a body of 
knowledge about physical activ- 

_ ity—that is, about voluntary human 
_movement performed intentionally 
_i n order to achieve ag oal. 

You may not have fully appreciated it until now, Indeed, physical activity is part of human nature. 
but performing physical activity consumes most of It is an important means by which we explore and 
your daily life. Even if you don’t go to the gym or discover our world. Linking movement with com- 
athletic field or engage in hard labor on a given plex cognitive plans helps us define ourselves as 
day, you will probably get out of bed, walk to human beings. A significant part of our lifetime is 
the bathroom, brush your teeth, get dressed, eat spent in learning to master a broad range of phys- 
breakfast, and make your way to class. After your ical activities, from the earliest skills of reaching, 
morning classes, you will probably eat lunch, visit grasping, and walking to enormously complex 
the library, go back to your room, and perform skills such as hitting a baseball, performing a som- 
some cleaning and organizational chores. All of ersault, or playing the piano. Most of us master a 
these are forms of physical activity. broad range of physical activities at a moderate 

If you take a moment to reflect on how phys- level of competence. Others concentrate on a 
ically active you are, you will see that your life limited number of skills, and this focus can lead 
involves an endless variety of physical activity. You to extraordinary performances. For example, NBA 
walk, reach, run, lift, leap, throw, grasp, wave, push, star Steph Curry’s ability to sink three-point shots 
pull, move your fingers and toes, adjust your head consistently from 30 feet (9 meters) away under 
for a better line of vision, adjust your posture, and defensive pressure is the result of intense practice 
perform thousands of other movements as part and motivation, as is Yo Yo Ma’s skill in positioning 
of living a common human existence. As a result, the bow on the cello’s strings or a pilot’s ability 
physical activity is essential in your work, whether to land a fighter jet on the runway of an aircraft 
you perform hard physical labor or precise tasks carrier that is being tossed by the sea. 
with less energy expenditure. We also use physical In this chapter, we talk about physical activity 
activity to express ourselves in gesture, music, art, in general terms and explain its relation to the 
and dance. field of kinesiology, which is a discipline or 



Chapter 1|I ntroduction to Kinesiology Zz 

body of knowledge focused on physical activity Career opportunities have expanded greatly 
(Newell, 1990a; National Academy of Kinesiology, for college-trained professionals with in-depth 
2020). Reading this chapter carefully will help you knowledge of the scientific and humanistic bases 
appreciate the complexity and diversity of physical of physical activity. Before the 1990s, most depart- 
activity, as well as its importance to human life. ments of kinesiology (then referred to as “physi- 
This chapter will also help you understand how the cal education”) were designed mainly to prepare 
discipline of kinesiology is organized. Since you’ve physical education teachers and coaches. Now, 
been physically active throughout your life, you however, kinesiology serves as the academic base 
already have some knowledge of physical activity. for a diverse range of careers, including physical 
This background will be of enormous benefit to education teaching, coaching, physical therapy, 
you as you roll up your sleeves and begin to probe cardiac rehabilitation, sport management, athletic 
the depths of knowledge of kinesiology. However, training, fitness leadership and management, public 
prior experiences can also color your perceptions health, sports performance, and more. 
and bias your understanding, especially when you The growth in kinesiology also derives from 
must think about those experiences in new ways. At increasing awareness of the importance of physical 
times, therefore, you will have to set your assump- activity to health, learning, and longevity. Many 
tions aside so that you can examine physical activity also realize that kinesiology deserves to be studied 
from a fresh and exciting point of view. At times just as seriously and systematically as are biology, 
this may be more challenging than you might think. psychology, sociology, and other disciplines in 

higher education. No doubt you’ve heard the word 
discipline, but you may not fully understand what 

Interest in the Discipline it means in this context. A discipline is a body 

of Kinesiology of knowledge organized around a certain theme 
or focus (see figure 1.1); it embodies knowledge 

Because people are now more aware than ever of that learned people throughout the world consider 
the importance of physical activity, enrollment in worthy of study. The focus of a discipline identifies 
college and university programs devoted to the what is studied by those who work in the disci- 
study of physical activity has been on the rise. The pline. For example, biology focuses on life forms, 
number of undergraduate students majoring in kine- psychology on the mind and mental and emotional 
siology has increased dramatically (Thomas, 2014; processes, and anthropology on cultures. Although 
Wojciechowska, 2010), making kinesiology one of debates continue about the best focus and scope for 
the fastest-growing majors in higher education and a diverse field like kinesiology, it is now generally 
often one of the largest academic units on campus. regarded as the discipline that focuses on human 
This surge in interest has two major causes: a growth physical activity. 
in physical activity-related professions and a greater 
appreciation for the importance of physical activity. 

/ Disciplinary 
science 

—— 
nea - Human social interaction 

Light of Biology 

sconcei  -‘Antnh ee|  ae : 
Life forms 

Kinesiology 

Culture 

Physical activity 

GONE The disciplines of science each focus on knowledge of one topic, and kinesiology focuses on the 
topic of human physical activity. 



Introduction to Kinesiology 

Physical Activity: 
Physical activity 

The Focus of Kinesiology experience 

In your college courses, you may have noticed 
Professional ~ 

that disciplines are not all learned or studied in experience in — 
the same way. Art, for example, may be studied physical activity _ 

through reading, writing, and experimentation with 
studio projects. People learn history, literature, and 
philosophy largely through reading, writing, mem- Scholarship 
orization, debate, and discussion. The same activ- of 

physical activity : 
ities are important when learning chemistry and 
biology, but these disciplines also involve active 
participation in laboratory exercises and reports. 

People learn kinesiology in three different but GUE #] Three interrelated sources of knowledge 
related ways (see figure 1.2), one of which is through in kinesiology. 

physical activity experience. Just as students in 
art and music learn to appreciate their disciplines 
in part by watching, listening, and performing, you females, or persons affected by disease or disability. 
can develop your understanding of kinesiology A third way of learning about physical activity 
in part through the direct personal experience of is through professional experience in physical 
watching or performing physical activity. A second activity. Here, the focus is placed not so much 
way of developing an understanding of kinesiology on learning to perform physical activity or on 
is through the scholarship of physical activity. learning about it but on learning by designing 
This way of learning involves researching, reading and implementing physical activity programs for 
about, studying, and discussing with colleagues both clients in one’s professional practice. For example, 
theoretical and practical aspects of physical activity; professionals such as athletic trainers, physical 
it also involves modeling, experiments, laboratory education teachers, strength coaches, and cardiac 
experiences, reporting, and disciplinary peer-review. rehabilitation specialists systematically manipu- 
We need all these forms of study to master the varied late the physical activity experiences of students, 
subjects in the kinesiology curriculum. Where does clients, patients, and others whom they serve in 
the knowledge of these subjects come from? Mostly, order to help them achieve personal goals. Those 
it comes from work done by scholars in the field professionals then learn more about the effects of 
of kinesiology who have developed and added to physical activity in the context of individuals and 
the knowledge base through systematic research real-world complications. 
and scholarship. Scholars who conduct research These three sources of knowledge about kinesi- 
in biomechanics, motor learning, pedagogy, and ology provide the organizational structure for this 
many other subdisciplines of kinesiology develop book. Part I continues by exploring the knowledge 
important foundational knowledge for the scholarly gained through physical activity experience—for 
study of physical activity. example, learning a human movement by partic- 

A subdiscipline in kinesiology is often related ipating in an organized sport, a physical activity 
to a broader, more established “parent” discipline, class, or a recreational physical activity. Part II then 
such as psychology, physiology, sociology, biology, focuses on seven subdisciplines of the scholarship 
history, or philosophy. For instance, exercise phys- of physical activity that are common in university 
iology draws on basic concepts and theories from curriculums, and part II describes the professional 
physiology, the study of motor behavior draws on experience in physical activity that is involved in 
psychology, and the philosophy of physical activity common career areas for kinesiology graduates. 
draws on the general field of philosophy. These 
relationships mean that kinesiology students must 
develop a working knowledge of the language, —KEY POINT o--oe ie a ee 
theories, and conceptual frameworks of a number 

The three sources of knowledge that constitute the 
of major disciplines and learn to apply them to 

discipline of kinesiology are physical activity experi- 
physical activity. Some subdisciplines focus on the 

ence, scholarship of physical 
effects of physical activity in particular popula- activity, and professional 

tions, such as older adults, elite athletes, children, experience in physical activity. 
SSS 



Chapter 1 |I ntroduction to Kinesiology 

Knowledge gained through these three sources scientific accuracy of exercise recommendations 
becomes part of the discipline of kinesiology only from an exercise physiologist than in those offered 
when it is embedded in a college or university by a television or internet exercise guru who lacks 
curriculum in kinesiology or is universally accepted formal training? Would you be more likely to trust 
and used by kinesiology scholars in their research. the recommendations of a university specialist 
We say this in order to clarify precisely what is con- in pedagogy when organizing physical activity 
sidered part of the “official” discipline and what is instruction for a large group of young children 
not. Many people experience physical activity (e.¢., than the recommendations of a volunteer coach 
mowing the lawn, playing golf), study it informally who has no formal training in kinesiology? Given 
(e.g., read Sports Illustrated or popular websites your decision to invest several years of hard work 
or books on fitness or sport), or engage in some in preparing for a career in the specialized field of 
form of physical activity leadership (e.g., volun- kinesiology, your answer to all three questions is 
teering as a Little League or school coach) outside likely to be yes. There is strong research evidence 
the confines of a university curriculum. However, for this position; many studies have reported signif- 
these activities do not constitute the practice of icant improvements in skills and fitness, and lower 
kinesiology, and the people engaging in them are rates of injury, in programs based on kinesiology 
not kinesiologists as defined in this text. research compared to traditional instruction or 

Although these activities may be important and training (see the Research and Evidence-Based 
valuable in their own right, they do not constitute Practice boxes throughout this text). 
practicing kinesiology any more than a business- 
person’s use of basic psychological principles to What Is Physical Activity? 
motivate her sales force constitutes practicing 
psychology. The discipline of psychology remains You may think it silly to ask what is meant by the 

tied to the college and university curriculum term physical activity. Everybody knows what it 

and to the research conducted by psychologists. is, so why waste time defining it? However, defi- 

Similarly, people may use the principles of kine- nitions are important, especially in scientific and 

siology outside of the discipline, but kinesiology professional fields where terms are often defined 

per se remains a function of curriculums and the differently than they are in everyday language. 

consensus of research usually formalized within These technical definitions ensure that people 

universities. working in a particular profession or discipline 
share a common understanding of key terms. (This 
book’s glossary includes definitions of many kinesi- 

J0SR 20) ology-related terms.) Even so, kinesiologists do not 
all agree on the best technical definition of physical 

Only knowledge about physical activity that is formally 
activity. Therefore, before we go any further, let 

included in a college or university curriculum and based us ensure that we have the same understanding of 
on the consensus of research by kinesiology scholars what physical activity is. A diverse field with many 
is considered to be part of the body of knowledge of subdisciplines like kinesiology sometimes has a 
kinesiology. variety of meanings for terms, and this can result 

in miscommunication (Knudson, 2019). 
In everyday language, almost any muscular 

Another reason for limiting our definition of 
action is considered physical activity. Throwing a 

kinesiology is that the knowledge you acquire by 
javelin, driving a car, walking, performing a cart- 

studying it is more highly organized and more 
wheel, swimming, digging a ditch, hammering a 

scientifically verifiable than common everyday 
nail, scratching your head—all are examples of 

knowledge about physical activity. Universities 
physical activity. So are the blinking of your eye 

use rigorous methods to organize and monitor the 
and the kick you exhibit when a doctor taps your 

accuracy of the knowledge in their curriculums and 
patellar tendon to test your reflexes; some people 

in the research conducted by their faculty members. would even use the term physical activity to 
Think about it: Would you have more confidence 

describe the contraction of your diaphragm when 
in recommendations made by a university kinesi- 

you sneeze or the peristaltic action of your small 
ologist who specializes in fencing or firefighting 

intestine brought on by muscular contractions. 
than in recommendations made by someone who 

Do all of these muscular actions warrant equal 
fences as a hobby or is a part-time volunteer fire- 

attention from kinesiologists? Not really. Although 
fighter? Would you have more confidence in the 



Introduction to Kinesiology 

all are examples of human movement, they are too physical activity that holds interest for people in 

diverse in form and purpose to be studied by any the field of kinesiology. 
single discipline. Indeed, if kinesiology focused on Even so—and this is the third point to note about 

all forms of human movement, then kinesiologists Newell’s definition—simply moving your body 

would study everything that humans do, because does not constitute physical activity. Rather, the 

living is moving (see the sidebar Physical Activity movements must be directed toward a purposeful 

and Doing). end. This distinction can be confusing, especially 
For this reason, kinesiologists use a narrower when we consider that the term kinesiology is 

definition of physical activity than people typically derived from the Greek words kinesis G(novement) 
use in everyday language. The discipline requires and kinein (to move). Movement consists of any 
a definition that is neither too inclusive (e.g., all change in the position of one’s body parts rela- 
human movement) nor too exclusive (e.g., only tive to each other or in space. Of course, physical 
human movement related to arts, sport, or work). activity requires that we move our bodies or body 
The definition used in this text takes its cue from parts, but movement by itself does not constitute 
Karl Newell’s formulation of physical activity as physical activity. One way to think about the rela- 
“intentional, voluntary movement directed toward tionship between movement and physical activity 
achieving an identifiable goal” (1990b). is this: Movement is a necessary but not sufficient 

Notice three things about Newell’s definition: condition for physical activity. 
First, it does not stipulate anything about the Only movement that is intentional and volun- 
energy requirements of the movements used to tary—purposefully directed toward an identifiable 
produce the activity. The highest levels of energy goal—meets the technical definition of physical 
are typically required for large-muscle activities, activity that is used in this text. This formulation 
such as swimming, lifting weights, and running excludes all involuntary reflexes and all physiolog- 
marathons. However, Newell’s definition does not ical movements controlled by involuntary muscles, 
limit physical activity to such activities. Indeed, such as peristalsis, swallowing, and reflexes such 
smaller-scale activities such as typing, handwriting, as eye blinking. It also excludes voluntary move- 
sewing, and surgery are every bit as much forms of ments that people perform without having a goal 
physical activity as are large-muscle activities such in mind. For example, a thoughtless scratch of the 
as chopping wood. head, absentminded twirling of one’s hair, and the 

Second, the setting in which physical activity repetitive movements of a compulsive-obsessive psy- 
takes place is irrelevant. Surely, shooting a basket- chiatric patient constitute human movement but fall 
ball is a form of physical activity, and so is tossing a outside of the technical definition of physical activity 
piece of paper into a wastebasket. Pole-vaulting is because they are not designed to achieve a goal. 
a physical activity, and so is jumping over a fence. 
Playing hopscotch is a physical activity, and so is 
swinging a sledgehammer. In other words, just as EeY PON ee 
physical activity takes place in many settings, it Physical activity consists of human movement that is 
also takes many forms. Wrestling and skiing differ intentional, voluntary, and directed toward achieving 
greatly from typing and performing sign language, 

an identifiable goal; it does not include movements 
but all are forms of physical activity. In chapter 

performed aimlessly or without a specific purpose. 
2, you will learn more about the wide range of 

Physical Activity and Doing 

The distinguished neurophysiologist Sir Charles Sherrington wrote the following in his classic 
book Man on His Nature: “All [humans] can do is to move things, and [their] muscle contraction is 
[their] sole means thereto” (1940, p. 107). What do you think Sherrington meant when he said 
that all we can do is “move things”? Can you think of anything that you can do without moving? 
Does thinking involve movement at the molecular level? What does your answer imply about the 
importance of movement and physical activity in our lives? (Hint: What is the dictionary definition 
of doing?) Some have said “movement is life.” Do you agree? 



Chapter 1| Introduction to Kinesiology 9 eae 

Defining Physical Activity 

Although we are all familiar with physical activity, we rarely think deeply about it. Before you con- 
tinue reading this chapter, think carefully about the following questions. Take time to compare 
your answers with those of your classmates. 

> How would you define physical activity? 
> What do you consider to be the most important characteristics of physical activity? 
> What methods can you think of that kinesiologists might use to study physical activity? 
> Can you name five professions that use physical activity? 

After you have thought about or discussed these questions, rewrite your definition of physical activity. 

As you read the literature in kinesiology, you teach bowling and archery, whereas occupational 
will soon discover that kinesiologists and scholars and physical therapists may treat stroke patients by 
in related fields define physical activity in various using gentle movements or teach elderly residents 
ways. This variation is to be expected given the of a nursing home how to use a knife and fork, 
diversity of human movements and the range of how to bathe, or how to comb their hair—none of 
disciplines that pursue interests related to physi- which requires the expenditure of large amounts 
cal activity. For example, the Centers for Disease of energy. Thus, although the CDC’s definition is 
Control and Prevention (CDC) has been very appropriate for that organization’s health-promo- 
influential in keeping the U.S. public aware of the tion mission, it is too restrictive for kinesiology 
importance of physical activity for healthful living. scholars and professionals because it eliminates 
The CDC (2015) defined physical activity as “any many types of physical activity. 
bodily movement produced by skeletal muscle that Of course, we could limit our technical defini- 
increases energy expenditure above a basal level. tion of physical activity to physical activities that 
In these guidelines, [the term] physical activity relate directly to exercise and sport. Indeed, this 
generally refers to the subset of physical activity definition might hold some appeal, both because 
that enhances health.” kinesiology is rooted historically in exercise and 

Now, let us take the CDC’s definition apart. First, sport (see chapter 4) and because many students 
it limits physical activity to voluntary movement enter the field with their sights set on a career in 
(performed by skeletal muscles), which seems exercise or sport. Even so, kinesiology scholars, 
sensible because most kinesiologists are interested who have long debated these issues, have generally 
in voluntary rather than involuntary movements of concluded that this limited definition would be 
the body. At the same time, however, it seems too incorrect because the field embraces a far wider 
narrow because it limits physical activity to move- range of physical activity than sport and exercise. 
ments that increase energy expenditure above a For example, kinesiologists study basic postural 
base level. Obviously, kinesiologists are interested mechanisms, the physiology and biomechanics of 
in high-energy forms of physical activity, such as repetitive work tasks, the development of reach- 
running, lifting weights, and exercising. However, ing and grasping behaviors in infants, and daily 
they do not limit their interest to these health- and life-support activities (e.g., balance) in elderly 
longevity-related aspects of human movement; people. Similarly, physical education teachers teach 

they also study skilled movement that may require children how to perform both fundamental move- 

little energy expenditure, and they may study the ment patterns (e.g., hopping, running, skipping) 

adverse effects of inactivity and sedentary behav- and expressive physical activities (e.g., dancing). 

iors on health, learning, and longevity. Kinesiologists working in rehabilitation programs 

For example, motor control researchers may be teach patients to recover lost capacities, such as 

interested in measuring fine motor skills or reac- walking, sitting, rising from a chair, and driving a 

tion times, such as the time required to move one’s car. These activities do not relate strictly to sport 

hand a short distance under different experimental or exercise. Moreover, as the range of occupations 

conditions. Similarly, kinesiology professionals pursued by kinesiology graduates continues to 

practice in broad areas of physical activity. Physical expand, we need a technical definition of physical 

education teachers and coaches, for instance, often activity that reaches beyond exercise and sport. 



a 10 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Context-Based Definitions 

Sometimes kinesiologists focus so closely on the specific area of physical activity in which they 

work that they define physical activity in terms that make sense only to them. For example, the 

definition promoted by the CDC was written by physiologists and public health experts who are 

concerned about the health ramifications of failing to engage in daily vigorous exercise and who 

therefore include the qualification about energy expenditure. (The health benefits of physical activity 

are roughly proportional to the level of energy expenditure.) How might physical activity be defined 

by coaches using only their focused experiences of physical activity? By physical therapists? By 

dance teachers? 

What Is Kinesiology? Although individual departments may choose to 
shape their curriculums and research agendas on 

Departments of kinesiology are the only academic 
the basis of selected aspects of the discipline, such 

units at colleges and universities that identify the 
institutional preferences should not be interpreted 

study of physical activity as their sole mission and 
as reflecting a comprehensive definition of the 

offer an organized curriculum to teach it. Beyond the 
discipline of kinesiology. Small universities may 

academic realm, you have surely noticed the many 
not be able to support a large, comprehensive 

websites, blogs, books, and magazines that address 
department of kinesiology. 

sport and fitness. Many of these sources feature 
material provided by people who lack in-depth 
education in kinesiology; as a result, this material Some Focuses of Physical Activity 
may have no basis in either science or systematic 
knowledge and study. Thus, we cannot consider in Kinesiology 
them to be part of the discipline of kinesiology. Kinesiology focuses on a variety of human physical 

The American Kinesiology Association (AKA), activities, including dance, exercise, fundamental 
an association of academic departments of kinesi- movements, sport, and therapy. You already know 
ology at North American universities, defines kine- much about these forms or categories of physical 
siology as “an academic discipline which involves activity. Indeed, positive experiences in one or 
the study of physical activity and its impact on more of these forms are often what bring students 
health, society, and quality of life” (2021). As a to kinesiology majors. Beyond your personal expe- 
discipline, kinesiology draws on several sources riences, it is also important for you to appreciate 
of knowledge, including personal and corporate the variety of other activities that hold interest for 
physical activity experiences, professional practices kinesiologists. 
centered on physical activity, and scholarly study of Consider the following examples, while noting 
and research about physical activity itself. Although that they do not constitute an exhaustive classifica- 
the discipline is most often associated with the tion of all physical activity and that the categories 
third source—scholarly study and research—AKA they include are not mutually exclusive. One exam- 
recognizes that the body of knowledge of kinesi- ple is dance, in which people may participate for 
ology is informed by and defined by the other two artistic expression, exercise, competition, or social 
sources as well. recreation. Similarly, people may participate in 

Ultimately, the uniqueness of kinesiology as a competitive judo partly because they enjoy it and 
discipline derives from its embrace and integration also because of its health benefits. Other examples 
of multidimensional or interdisciplinary study include prehabilitation training programs and 
and application of physical activity—including conditioning programs aimed at reducing one’s 
biological, medical, and health-related aspects but risk of injury due to imbalances in flexibility or 
also psychological, social-humanistic, and various strength. More specifically, several biomechani- 
professional perspectives as well. This synthesis or cal and sports medicine studies have shown that 
integration of many disciplinary perspectives into specific, specialized training programs (usually 
a unique field has been described as interdisciplin- implemented by athletic trainers or strength and 
ary (Harris, 1993; Knudson, 2020; Zeigler, 1990). conditioning professionals) can reduce one’s risk 



Chapter 1 |I ntroduction to Kinesiology 1 

AKA Core Curriculum Elements 

The American Kinesiology Association has established four major elements of a common core 
curriculum for an undergraduate degree in kinesiology. Notwithstanding the unique features of 
some majors in kinesiology departments, the following areas of study are common to kinesiology 
degree programs: (1) the importance of physical activity in health, wellness, and quality of life; 
(2) scientific foundations of physical activity; (3) cultural, historical, and philosophical dimensions 
of physical activity; and (4) the practice of physical activity. How do the courses in your major 
program align with these four core elements? How does this text align with the four AKA core 
curriculum elements? 

of certain traumatic or overuse injuries (e.g., Elliott as a result of injury, disease, or aging. Because 
& Khangure, 2002; Herman et al., 2009; Hewett et exercise involves many types of programmed 
al., 1999; Noehren et al., 2011). Science has con- physical activity focused on improving movement 
firmed the folklore of an ounce of prevention, be function, it is helpful to break the concept down 
it exercise for health or to reduce risk of injury or into subcategories. 
difficult recovery from surgery (prehabilitation), » Training consists of exercise performed to 
is worth a pound of cure (rehabilitation). Use of improve athletic, military, work-related, or recre- 
these physical activity categories is not to make ation-related performance (see chapter 3). Physical 
hard-and-fast distinctions but to provide guides activity as training is particularly important to 
for understanding and appreciating the types of kinesiology graduates who embark on careers as 
physical activity that concern kinesiologists. strength and conditioning specialists for university, 

Olympic, or professional sport teams. Kinesiol- 
ogy graduates may take the test for the Certified 

od AA ot |be es Be ees Strength and Conditioning Specialist (CSCS) and 
Kinesiology is a discipline that focuses on a variety other advanced credentials affiliated with the 
of physical activity forms, including dance, exercise, National Strength and Conditioning Association 
fundamental movements, sport, and therapy. (NSCA). 

» Health-related exercise is undertaken to 
develop or maintain a sound working body and 

Dance to reduce the risk of disease for the purpose of 
healthy longevity. Physical activity as health-related 

The expressive movement of dance is a compelling exercise serves as the primary focus for kinesiol- 
form of physical activity common to all cultures. ogy graduates who work as fitness leaders and 
Dance involves body movements, often timed to personal trainers. 
music, that convey messages, emotions, or artistic 

» Cosmetic exercise consists of training 
values. It is a form of physical activity performed 

intended to reshape a person’s body for aesthetic 
both for its intrinsic value to participants and 

reasons. This kind of systematic training is used by 
for its performance value to spectators. The art 

bodybuilders, models, and persons wanting to lose 
and science of dance have a long history with 

or gain weight for a summer trip. It is sometimes 
kinesiology, given that early physical education 

difficult to determine whether trying to achieve, say, 
departments, where kinesiology originated, often 

a smaller waistline is more for the cosmetic or the 
included faculty who focused on the study and 

health benefits. Even so, it is important for kinesi- 
instruction of dance. 

ology professionals to understand the motivations 
and difficulties involved in exercising to change 

Exercise one’s body shape or size because these goals are 

Another important form of physical activity is exer- often difficult to achieve. Motivating clients on this 

cise. People engage in exercise to improve their difficult path could be as important as knowing 

appearance, physical performance, or health, or to the best exercise and dietary programs to achieve 

regain performance ability that has been reduced the cosmetic goals. 



mg 12 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Fundamental Movements teams, other individuals, established records, or 

one’s personal best. Fourth, this definition of sport 
Given the wide variety of physical activity options, does not require that the performer use a certain 
kinesiology often focuses on the human-movement number of muscle groups or body parts or expend 
building blocks of activities. These building blocks, a certain amount of metabolic energy. 
known as fundamental movement patterns, are 
the broad categories of skilled human movements 
that involve large muscles and are used for gen- Therapy 
eral purposes (Knudson, 2013). Examples include Therapy or therapeutic exercise involves spe- 
carrying, catching, jumping, kicking, running, cialized and individualized exercise performed to 
throwing, and walking. Scholars study fundamental restore or develop physical capacities that have 
movements in order to understand the mechanisms been lost due to injury, disease, behavioral patterns, 
and generate theories of human movement and or aging. For example, individualized therapeutic 
skill development. Such knowledge is used by physical activity programs are prescribed and imple- 
kinesiology professionals to help their clients. For mented by kinesiology graduates who complete 
example, elementary physical education teachers additional education as athletic trainers or occu- 
help 1st graders learn how to perform fundamental pational or physical therapists. Stroke patients, for 
movement patterns such as skipping, throwing, instance, sometimes require many sessions of physi- 
and hopping. When children develop skill in these cal therapy to help them regain the ability to perform 
fundamental movements (e.g., overarm throw) at important fundamental and self-care movements 
an early age, they may later be able to achieve of daily living. Traditionally, therapeutic exercise 
higher levels of proficiency in sport (e.g., baseball was limited to remediation or rehabilitation of lost 
pitching) than they would if they had experienced function; however, recent prospective research has 
more limited practice in fundamental movements. encouraged many medical and allied health profes- 
Often allied health professionals (athletic trainers, sionals to adopt the wellness-promotion or injury 
physical therapists, and occupational therapists) reduction perspective pioneered by kinesiology, so 
must focus on regaining fundamental movement prehabilitation programs are more common. 
patterns or activities and movements of daily living 
when patients suffer illness or injury (see the later Kinesiology and Your Career 
section on Therapy). 

Kinesiology opens the door to a wide range of 
careers. Because kinesiology programs expose you 

Sport 
to broad knowledge about physical activity, they 

Sport involves skilled movement organized in provide excellent preparation for careers in fitness 
game contexts, where players try to achieve a goal leadership and consulting, teaching and coaching, 
in a manner specified by rules and usually involving cardiac and neuromuscular rehabilitation, sport 
competition. This definition includes four elements management, strength and conditioning, public 
that bear close consideration. First, the physical health, medicine, and many other areas of physical 
activity found in sport is “skilled,” which means activity. Undergraduate programs in kinesiology 
that it is performed efficiently and effectively. Not also provide critical preparation for students who 
all forms of physical activity require a great deal wish to further their studies with graduate or pro- 
of skill, but in every type of sport the advantage fessional training in such fields as athletic training, 
belongs to competitors who have learned to move physical therapy, occupational therapy, podiatry, 
their bodies skillfully: the soccer player who passes chiropractic care, medicine, nutrition, and, of 
the ball deftly to her teammate, the golfer who course, kinesiology itself. 
strikes the ball squarely, and the gymnast who Many college graduates pursue master’s and 
completes a double rotation on his dismount. doctoral degrees in kinesiology (see figure 1.3). 

Second, rules are essential in sport. Rules set by Some, like those preparing to be physical education 
national or international governing bodies provide teachers, do so to become more knowledgeable 
a level playing field for competitors. They are also about their profession and to meet certification 
essential for organizing games; without rules, play- requirements. Others pursue graduate work to meet 
ers could do whatever they felt like doing, and the the educational requirements of a profession; in 
game would become chaotic. Third, the physical fact, a master’s degree is increasingly being viewed 
activities performed in sport tend to be framed as the minimum requirement for most allied health 
by competition—that is, performed against other professions. For example, as of 2023 all nationally 



Chapter 1 |I ntroduction to Kinesiology 13 

Kinesiology Colleagues 

Kevin Guskiewicz 
Have you ever imagined yourself working for the National Football 
League to help understand the causes of concussions and other 
brain injuries? How about waking up one day to find that you 
have been given several hundred thousand dollars to pursue that 
work? That’s exactly what happened to Kevin Guskiewicz, Kenan 
Distinguished Professor of Athletic Training in the Department of 
Exercise and Sport Science at the University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill. He is an athletic trainer and researcher who has been 
a longtime scientific advisor to the NFL thanks to his research 
on sportrelated concussions. His work has been so influential 
that in 2011 he received a MacArthur Foundation Fellowship or 
“Genius Grant.” These unannounced awards are given to schol- 
ars and artists whose work is deemed to show great promise 
for improving the world; the award’s prestige and funding make Kevin Guskiewicz, Chancet lor and pr
it essentially equivalent to a Nobel Prize. Guskiewicz and many o o

f f
 e
Ex s
e s
rc o
i r
se  
 and § port Science, Univers

N i
o t
r y
t  
h o
 f 
Carolina. 

other kinesiology scholars are changing the world for the better. 
Expertise and leadership such as that displayed by Guskiewicz are found in many 
other outstanding kinesiology scholars who have been rewarded with appointments as deans, 
provosts, and university presidents. Dr. Guskiewicz serves as Chancellor of the University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill. 

accredited programs in athletic training must be Other practitioners may pursue much narrower 
offered at the graduate level because students must interests. For example, fitness leaders focus espe- 
earn a master’s degree in order to be eligible for the cially on cardiorespiratory fitness, strength, and 
national certifying exam to practice in the profession. exercise involving the body’s large muscles. These 
Sometimes master’s training enhances a graduate’s practitioners are particularly interested in how 
profile to qualify for additional training in profes- such activities can alter physiological function, 
sional doctoral programs (MD or DPT). Sometimes body composition, and size. Similarly, professionals 
students continue their studies beyond the master’s working in athletic training, occupational or physi- 
level in order to obtain a research-oriented doctoral cal therapy focus on physical activity as a medium 
degree (PhD) in kinesiology so that they can become for rehabilitation. In contrast, sport marketers have 
college or university faculty members or researchers. an altogether different interest in physical activ- 

Professionals trained in kinesiology share a ity—namely, how physical activity performances 
common interest in and curiosity about physical by collegiate or elite athletes can be made more 
activity in its broadest dimensions. Physical edu- appealing to paying audiences. Thus, in addition 
cation teachers may have the broadest perspective to developing your understanding of and appreci- 
because of the enormous breadth of their teaching ation for physical activity in general, you should 
assignments, which can range from fitness and seek to understand physical activity in the context 
sport skills to dance and developmental skills. of whatever specialized professional practice you 

In addition, these practitioners may take special choose to enter. 
interest in using physical activity to develop social 
responsibility, academic achievement, and other Why Kinesiology? 
desirable personal traits in children and adoles- 

Scholars have debated at length which term best 
cents. Much recent research has confirmed initial 

characterizes an academic discipline focused 
hypotheses that physical education can provide 

broadly on physical activity. For many years, the 
secondary benefits of improved learning and cog- 

nition beyond the primary physiological benefits of term physical education was considered appro- 
priate for the holistic study of physical activity; in 

the physical activity in the program (Alvarez-Bueno 
the first half of the 1900s, however, the use of the 

et al., 2017; Donnelly et al., 2016). 



Introduction to Kinesiology 

Graduate study in kinesiology Graduate study in related field 

MS/EdD/PhD in kinesiology MS and doctorate in health-related field 

Specialization in various subfields Athletic training or sports medicine 

Biomechanics Chiropractic care 

Exercise physiology Medicine 

Measurement and statistics Nutrition and dietetics 

Motor learning and control Occupational therapy 

Pedagogy Physical therapy 

Public health Physician assistant 
Sport history Podiatry 
Sport management Public health 
Sport philosophy Sports law 
Sport psychology 
Sport sociology Graduate study 

Physical education teacher or Fitness leader or a" Strength and Sport Health promotion 
coach personal trainer » conditioning specialist | management wellness 

Zoe e et ait 

_ y 

BS/BA degree in kinesiology 
[Mastery of entry level specialized professional education] 

ERTS HEROES DATE ESS TE ESSE 

GTS] An undergraduate degree in kinesiology can serve as the starting point for many physical activity 
careers, some of which require additional training in graduate programs. 

term became limited to the school physical educa- and sport science, human performance, health 
tion and physical education teacher preparation. and human performance, health and kinesiology, 
Today, physical education is generally understood human movement science, sport studies, exercise 
to refer to broad-based instructional programs in science, physical education, nutrition and kinesiol- 
physical activity, sport, and exercise offered by ogy, or some combination of such terms. A given 
public and private schools, colleges, and univer- department’s name is influenced most heavily by 
sities. Most colleges and universities continue to the mission, politics, and academic structure of its 
sponsor an activity program (sometimes referred to host college or university. 
as “the basic instruction program”) for the general The diverse range of departmental titles can 
student body. In addition, the term physical edu- be confusing, which is a problem not faced by 
cation teacher education (PETE) is used to refer some older fields, such as anthropology, sociol- 
to the academic pedagogy specialization in many ogy, psychology, and history. Because kinesiology 
kinesiology departments that prepares teachers of is a young, evolving discipline—and because 
these programs. disciplines often need a long time to define them- 

However, because most departments originally selves—it is not surprising that various names are 
referred to as physical education departments still used to identify the field. Variation in depart- 
now prepare students for a panorama of careers mental names also stems from the fact that in some 
in physical activity, the term physical education departments—usually at smaller colleges—kinesi- 
fails to capture the field’s breadth. Many alternative ology is but one of several majors offered to stu- 
names have been proposed for the discipline, and dents. Thus, a department that also prepares health 
the emerging term—which is the one used in this educators or recreation specialists may call itself 
text—is kinesiology. Still, your department might something like “kinesiology and leisure studies” or 
be called by a different name, such as exercise “health, exercise science, and recreation” to reflect 



Chapter 1| Introduction to Kinesiology 15 

Surging Support for Kinesiology 

The American Kinesiology Association currently identifies more than 170 departments of kinesiol- 
ogy at U.S. colleges and universities. Most of the departments at prestigious doctoral universities 
have adopted the term kinesiology because it best characterizes a discipline that deals with many 
forms of physical activity in diverse professional settings. This term has gained support from 
the National Academy of Kinesiology (NAK), an honorary society of a select group (up to 200) of 
elected scholars. The NAK was founded in 1930 as the American Academy of Physical Education 
but changed its name in 2010 to use the term kinesiology. A similar change was made in 2012 
by the National Association for Kinesiology and Physical Education in Higher Education, which 
shortened its name to the National Association for Kinesiology in Higher Education. Both of these 
changes reflect the growing acceptance of kinesiology as a name for the discipline. Moreover, 
according to the last several AKA surveys, kinesiology is the most common department name for 
this discipline in universities in the United States (e.g., Mahar & Crenshaw, 2015). The Canadian 
Kinesiology Alliance also promotes kinesiology as a stand-alone allied health profession supported 
by the national and provincial health care programs. Interest in kinesiology as a discipline and as 
its own profession in physical activity promotion is growing. 

the multiple degree programs that are offered. For muscle testing determines the course of therapy. 
example, at one large U.S. university, kinesiology Similarly, “dental kinesiology” applies virtually the 
degrees are offered along with two other degrees in same techniques in analyzing the motions of the 
the Department of Nutrition, Food, and Movement jaw and tongue, “behavioral kinesiologists” treat 
Sciences. Thus, we must be careful not to confuse patients using biofeedback, and “spiritual kinesi- 
the titles of departments at particular universities ologists” claim to promote healing by uniting body 
with the name of the field as a whole as it is coming and soul. These uses of the term kinesiology are 
to be known in the United States and the world. rare and not the primary academic meaning that 

None of the various names used for our field is older and more widely recognized by the world. 
are wrong, but most scholars emphasize the need So far, these alternative meanings of kinesiol- 
for a single term that is broad enough to describe ogy have not been problematic, given the lack of 
the discipline in full. Although not all scholars scientific evidence for their claims as compared 
believe that kinesiology is the best name for the with the robust, international body of research in 
discipline, we think that it is. Therefore, regardless academic kinesiology. Still, the AKA (2021) has clar- 

of the name of the department in which you are ified the differences between academic kinesiology 
enrolled, we encourage you to refer to the disci- and other practices labeled as “kinesiology” in the 
pline as kinesiology. following statement: 

The academic discipline of kinesiology is 
Potential Sources of Confusion taught and researched in colleges and univer- 
About Kinesiology sities and is to be differentiated from Applied 

Kinesiology and other fields that use the 
One could argue that the best term for our field is 

term “kinesiology” (dental, spiritual, holistic, 
academic kinesiology, which would distinguish it 

bio-spiritual), some of which lack grounding 
from what might be called clinical kinesiology. This 

in the scientific study of physical activity. 
latter term is still used sometimes to refer to func- 

The AKA supports the academic discipline 
tional anatomy courses taught in medical and phys- 

of kinesiology. 
ical therapy programs that help students learn how 
muscles and bones produce specific movements. 

In addition, some forms of alternative medicine 
Allied Fields 

have recently begun to use the term kinesiology 

in their titles. For example, some practitioners of Kinesiology has historical ties with disciplines such 

chiropractic use “applied kinesiology,” which refers as public health education, dance, and recreation. 

to an alternative medicine technique in which Over time, however, these fields have begun to sep- 



a 16 introduction to Kinesiology 

arate into their own specializations. Because of this, Holistic Nature of Kinesiology 
in 2013, the original professional organization for We hope that by the time you complete this intro- 
all of these related fields in the United States—the 

ductory study of kinesiology, you will be convinced 
American Alliance for Health, Physical Education, 

of the holistic nature of physical activity and kine- 
Recreation and Dance (AAHPERD)—changed its 

siology. Holism refers to the interdependence of 
name to the Society of Health and Physical Educa- 

mind, emotion, body, and spirit. Although some 
tors (SHAPE America). The Canadian Association 

people think that kinesiology deals exclusively 
for Health, Physical Education, Recreation and 

with the body and with bodily movement, in reality 
Dance changed its name to Physical and Health 

it spans a much broader range. Physical activity 
Education Canada (PHE Canada) in 2008. These 

involves our minds, our emotions, and our souls 
two organizations now focus more on professional 

as much as it does our bodies. It is convenient to 
health and physical education than on kinesiology 

speak of physical activity because the physical 
or on older multidisciplinary units combining 

aspects are so easily observed, yet physical activity 
health, kinesiology, recreation, and dance. 

is also cognitive activity, emotional activity, and 
Of course, health problems that arise from inac- 

even spiritual activity for many people. It is usu- 
tivity hold great interest both for physical activity 

ally best to avoid the false dichotomy of separate 
professionals and for professionals in public health 

mind and body. 
and health education. However, public health pro- 

Thus, studying kinesiology will take you far 
fessionals are also interested in an array of other 

beyond the study of the biological aspects of 
problems (e.g., communicable diseases, smoking 

physical activity. Kinesiologists also study the psy- 
cessation, drug abuse, sanitation, etc.) that have 

chological antecedents and outcomes of physical 
little to do with physical activity. Similarly, recre- 

activity; the sociological, philosophical, and his- 
ation specialists are interested in physical activity 

torical foundations of sport and physical activity; 
as a leisure pursuit, but leisure pursuits stretch far 

the dynamics of skill development, performance, 
beyond those in which physical activity is a primary 

and learning; and the human processes involved 
concern. They also include, for example, travel, 

in teaching and learning physical activity. 
crafts, outdoor education, and nature study; orga- 
nized recreation programs that go beyond phys- 
ical activity are offered by parks, counties, cities, OeEY PON ee 
corporations, universities, and private companies. 
Finally, dance professionals often hold membership Although bodily aspects of kinesiology receive the most 

in artistic or other specialized organizations beyond attention, a kinesiology program must account for the 

kinesiology. In addition, although dancers are fact that human beings are holistic, multidimensional 
interested in physical activity, they focus on a much creatures characterized by the interrelated elements 
narrower slice of the physical activity pie—namely, of cognition, emotion, body, and soul. 
the expressive and artistic forms of movement. 

Today it may seem strange that this assortment of 
fields was ever combined into a single professional Think about the last time you went for a run, a 

organization, yet these fields are marked by a long brisk walk, or a bike ride. Wherever you were— 

historic relationship. Indeed, for most of the 20th perhaps letting your mind wander as you enjoyed 

century, they were represented in a single Health, the scenery of a lake, the beauty of a mountain 

Physical Education, Recreation and Dance (HPERD) trail, or the thrill of competition with a friend—this 

department at colleges and universities throughout activity may have seemed so easy that you under- 

most of the world; in fact, in some cases, they are estimated the complexity of its physiological and 

still housed in that department or have even grown psychological components. Physical activity is so 

to be a school or college. Today, however, each of much a part of our everyday lives that we often 

these fields has become more specialized and has forget how wonderfully complex the human body 

developed its own professional organizations and is. Even so, most students who enroll in kinesiology 
journals. In many cases these fields are now taught programs are actively curious about how the body 
in separate departments. Still, because of their functions. In your kinesiology program, you will 
shared history and the fact that they often have study anatomy and physiology as well as exercise 

similar human health-promotion missions, faculty physiology, biomechanics, sport and exercise psy- 
from these areas often work together as colleagues. chology, and motor behavior. These classes will 

help you understand and appreciate the many 



Chapter 1| Introduction to Kinesiology ve 

ag ee poe 

Experiencing the beauty of the world around us speaks to our holistic nature, which is an important focus of kinesiology. 
© franckreporter/Getty Images 

mechanisms and systems that enable our bodies to say that no other discipline is so diverse in its 
to perform physical activity. aims, so interdisciplinary in its subject matter, or 

You may also be required to take a course so complex in its organization as is kinesiology. 
exploring the philosophy of physical activity. If The three-dimensional knowledge of kinesi- 
so, you are fortunate because this course will help ology offered in this book—in terms of physical 
you understand how truly holistic and meaningful activity experience, scholarship of physical activity, 
physical activity is. By thinking philosophically, you and professional experience in physical activity—is 
will come to understand more fully the personal designed to help you organize your thinking about 
meaning that you discover in physical activity. This the discipline of kinesiology and the diversity of 
thinking will also sensitize you to myriad ethical physical activity. This approach will not only help 
issues associated with sport, exercise, and other you to develop a framework for understanding 
types of physical activity. physical activity and the physical activity profes- 

In addition, your study of the psychology and sions; it will also help you to understand your 
sociology of physical activity will help you appre- course work in kinesiology more deeply and to 
ciate how attitudes and social settings influence plan and pursue your career goals. 
our interpretations of these experiences. It might 
be easy to think about our bodies (or about spe- 
cific body parts, such as the heart, muscles, and Kinesiology and Evidence-Based 
bones) simply as machines or instruments used Practice 
by our minds or souls to achieve our purposes. 
In fact, your body is an indivisible part of your Beyond the requirements of a bachelor’s or grad- 

humanity. Indeed, it may not be an exaggeration uate degree, many educational and kinesiology 



a 18 Introduction to Kinesiology 

professions require practitioners to obtain state or how to evaluate the quality of different scientific 

national licensure or certifications. Many legally studies and to integrate that with experiential 

established professions base their services on prin- knowledge. This aligns with the three-dimensional 

ciples of evidence-based practice. Evidence-based picture of kinesiology knowledge (physical activity 

practice involves the use of one of several models experience, scholarship of physical activity, and 

for integrating three kinds of evidence to serve professional experience in physical activity) in 

clients: scientific research, professional or clinical this book. Throughout the disciplinary chapters of 

experience, and the values and specific character- this book there will be a boxed feature illustrating 

istics of the client. Formal evidence-based practice how scientific research in kinesiology contributes 

models grew out of evidence-based medicine in knowledge for evidence-based practice in a vari- 
the late 1980s at Oxford University (Centre for ety of professions. More on professionalism and 
Evidence-Based Medicine, 2021). Some of your evidence-based practice is presented in chapters 

training in kinesiology and beyond will be on 10 through 15. 

Research and Evidence-Based Practice in Kinesiology 
RugbySmart Uses Research to Reduce Injury Rates 

Earlier we noted that kinesiology research has driven innovations that improve human performance 
or well-being. One example of national-scale success is the RugbySmart program in New Zealand. 
Dr. Patria Hume and her colleagues first proposed a 10-point strategy to reduce the rate of injuries 
in one of the most popular sports in that country, rugby. Following proof-of-concept studies, and 
with interdisciplinary support from national sport governing bodies and the national health service, 
the program has substantially reduced the rate of serious spinal injuries in the sport (Quarrie 
et al. 2007, 2020). The success of this program has led to spin-offs, “Smart” injury prevention 
programs for several other sports in New Zealand. 

Professional Issues in Kinesiology 

Ensuring Equality, Evidence-Based Practice, and Expertise 
Kinesiology professionals have ethical requirements to provide effective, high-quality service to 
clients. Three common areas of this responsibility are equality, evidence-based practice, and 
expertise. Each chapter of this book describes how kinesiology knowledge can be applied to 
make professional decisions related to these issues. All three sources of kinesiology knowledge 
are illustrated, and key references for further study are cited. The book also presents a variety of 
areas of kinesiology in an effort to show how kinesiology knowledge applies to diverse areas of 
professional practice. 

Professional Issues in Kinesiology sidebars also provide examples of different formats and 
styles for scholarly citations and references that are common in the field of kinesiology with its 
many subdisciplines and professional applications. Many behavioral sciences in kinesiology use 
the American Psychological Association (APA) format, whereas publications in medicine and allied 
health often use the American Medical Association (AMA) format. At times, kinesiology profession- 
als also need to write reports or read research from other areas with different reporting styles. For 
more information about the APA and AMA styles, please see the following sources: 

>» American Medical Association. (2020). AMA manual of style (11th ed.). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

» American Psychological Association. (2020). Publication manual of the American Psychological 
Association (7th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. 



Chapter 1| Introduction to Kinesiology 19 

Wrap-Up In addition, you have learned something about 
how the field of kinesiology is organized. Spe- 

With this introductory knowledge under your cifically, the three main sources of knowledge in 
belt, you are now ready to dig into the topics of kinesiology are the experience that comes from 
physical activity and kinesiology more deeply. In participating in and watching physical activity, the 
this chapter, you have learned that kinesiology is scholarly study of physical activity, and the knowl- 
the study of physical activity, and you now know edge that comes from professional experience in 
that for kinesiologists, the term physical activity physical activity. These three sources of knowledge 
has a technical definition that is different from the parallel formal evidence-based practice systems 
colloquial use of the term. You have also learned that many professions use to ensure effective ser- 
that the expressions of physical activity studied vices to clients. 
by kinesiology vary widely, as do the professional 
careers related to the field. 

MORE INFORMATION ON KINESIOLOGY 

Organizations 

American Kinesiology Association (AKA) 

American Kinesiotherapy Association 

International Council for Health, Physical Education, Recreation, Sport, and Dance (ICHPER-SD) 

National Academy of Kinesiology (NAK) 

National Association for Kinesiology in Higher Education (NAKHE) 

PHE (Physical and Health Education) Canada 

SHAPE (Society of Health and Physical Educators) America 

Journals 
Clinical Kinesiology 

ICHPER-SD Journal of Research 

International Journal of Kinesiology in Higher Education 

International Journal of Kinesiology & Sports Science 

Journal of the Christian Society for Kinesiology, Leisure, and Sport Studies 

Journal of ICHPER:SD 

Journal of Kinesiology & Wellness 

Kinesiology 

Kinesiology Review 

Quest 

Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport 



mm 20 introduction to Kinesiology 

ReEVIEW QUESTIONS e 
1. What is the difference between movement and physical activity? Give an example of an 

instance in which human movement does not meet the technical definition of physical activity. 

2. What is meant when kinesiology is described as a holistic discipline? 

3. What forms or categories of physical activity are studied in kinesiology? Which receive the 
most attention, and how do they relate to each other? 

4. What are the three sources of knowledge of kinesiology? 

5. Can you think of examples of where kinesiology knowledge has improved performance or 
reduced rates of injury in vigorous physical activities? 

is i K Propel ») Go to HKPropel to complete the activities for this chapter. 



Importance of the Physical 
Activity Experience 

Timothy A. Brusseau and Duane V. Knudson 

In this chapter, we will 

© spark your thinking about thev arious types of physi 
undertaken for specific purposes ii n1  different. oci os or “spheres,4  

e help you appreciate physical activity.a s a signature of humanity, : | _ : 

¢ introduce you to some oft he potential benefits «a n imitations of . 
physical activity, 

e help you appreciate thew ays i n which ; 
human knowledge ofa nd potentialfor physical activity, : 

e help you develop insight into the factors that influence. cople’s 
= pereeptians ofpage ao and decisions toB EnEdee inv it, 

| activity. 



This chapter will stretch your conception of running, dancing, or swimming. These tasks at the 
physical activity. In reading it, you embark on an deli require rather precise movements of your arms 
expedition through a vast expanse of physical but rarely tax your cardiovascular system. So, as you 
activities performed for various reasons and in a relate this chapter to your everyday experiences, 
wide variety of settings. The purpose is both to don’t think only about how much physical activity 
expand your frame of reference for thinking about you performed; think also about your various kinds 
physical activity and to increase your appreciation of physical activity. 
of how critically important physical activity expe- The chapter also explores the importance of 
riences are to our daily lives and well-being. One each person’s experiences of physical activity; 
way to begin to appreciate the enormous variety of more specifically, it explores two major domains 
physical activities—and the way they intersect with of physical activity experience. The first domain 
your daily life—is to ask yourself how often and in involves direct experience of physical activity, 
what ways you were physically active during the where experience can be defined as any activity 
past week. In answering this question, you might that includes training, observation of practice, and 
first reflect on the amount of physical activity you personal participation. Activity experience includes 
performed. For example, you might think, “I waited performing physical activity as well as observing it. 
on 50 customers at the delicatessen where I work,” The second domain involves the inward, subjective 
or “I ran 4 miles on a wooded trail.” experience of physical activity, where experi- 

But it isn’t simply the volume of physical activity ence can be defined as one’s individual reaction 
that matters; the variety of physical activity expe- to events, feelings, or other stimuli. In this sense, 
riences is also important. For example, the types we may experience sadness, joy, beauty, and a 
of physical activity and movement performed in host of other emotions through physical activity. 
working at a delicatessen—such as slicing food, As you move through this chapter, you will gain 
making sandwiches, and operating a cash regis- appreciation for the importance of both domains 
ter—are all quite different from those involved in of physical activity experience in developing your 

a 22 



Chapter 2 |i mportance of the Physical Activity Experience 23 Zz 

Own Capacity to perform physical activity, gain activity carried out for the purpose of learning. 
experiential knowledge of physical activity, and As you may notice, some spheres are character- 
encourage physical activity in others. ized less definitively in terms of the social context. 

As noted in chapter 1, physical activity consists The self-sufficiency sphere, for example, includes 
of human movement intended to accomplish a physical activity carried out in order to survive and 
specific purpose. In your daily life—whether doing live an independent life. Although most of these 
something as simple as moving to the other side activities take place in the home, they can also 
of a room or as complicated as juggling three be performed at work, during leisure time, or in 
balls—the purposes you wish to achieve usually educational settings. Similarly, physical activity in 
determine both the type and the amount of physical the self-expression sphere may occur in a variety 
activity. This may sound simple enough; however, of social contexts but always serves the purpose 
in thinking about the enormous variety of goals of allowing us to express our emotions. 
and purposes of physical activity, and the various 
contexts in which that activity occurs, it is easy 
to feel overwhelmed. Therefore, in order to get a SIE YSPULN emcees eee er ees 
handle on the importance and pervasiveness of Kinesiology values experiential knowledge gained from 
physical activity in our lives, we need a system for physical activity in a variety of spheres: competition, 
organizing our physical activity experiences—that education, health, leisure, self-expression, self-suffi- 
is, a conceptual framework. 

ciency, and work. 
This framework also helps you understand the 

diversity of physical activity as a unique signature 
of what it means to be human. We move to live and As you study the spheres, keep in mind the 
we live to move. Physical activity gives us unique, following considerations: 
experiential knowledge of what it feels like to move 

¢ The spheres are not intended to uniquely 
and the results of our movements. This experiential 

classify specific types of physical activity. 
knowledge is quite useful for appreciating what 

They simply highlight the different com- 
others may experience in learning the same or 

partments and the diversity of life experi- 
similar physical activities. In chapter 1 we learned 

ences in which physical activity plays an 
that physical activity experience knowledge should 

important part. 
be integrated with knowledge from scholarship 
and professional experience for kinesiology pro- ¢ Some activities may be common in more 

fessionals to give the best, evidence-based advice. than one sphere of experience. For exam- 

This advice can contribute to the experience in all ple, if you run 3 miles (about 5 kilometers) 

spheres of physical activity. per day, this activity might be assigned to 

Physical activities can be classified into seven the sphere of leisure but would also relate 

spheres of experience (see the figure presented in to your health and perhaps your self-ex- 

the part I opener): pression. 

¢ The purpose of this chapter is not to com- 
1. Self-sufficiency 

partmentalize the activities but to provide 
. Self-expression you with a general framework for thinking 
Work about the importance, pervasiveness, and 

. Education diversity of physical activity in all aspects 
of your life. 

Leisure 

. Health The following sections explore each of the seven 
spheres of physical activity experience by examin- 

NW. NOC oOmpeFti tion 
ing some activities that they encompass. We discuss 

These spheres represent dimensions of everyday both positive and negative issues related to the 

life in which physical activity plays an important spheres and describe professionals who specialize 

and distinctive role. Generally, the spheres identify in addressing some of those issues. Remember that 

various purposes of physical activity that often the spheres serve merely to help you look at the 

relate to certain social contexts. For example, the many ways and contexts in which you experience 

work sphere includes all physical activity done physical activity. We hope this discussion chal- 

in order to meet the demands of employment, lenges you to think more deeply about the many 

whereas the education sphere includes physical levels of this field. 



me 24 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Sphere of Self-Sufficiency categories: activities of daily living (ADLs) and 
instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs). 

You spend a significant part of your life simply ADLs include personal behaviors related to groom- 
taking care of yourself, and you do so largely ing, using the toilet, dressing, eating, and walk- 
through the critical means of physical activity—for ing. People who need daily assistance with such 
example, eating breakfast, going from the bedroom tasks may be disabled by injury or disease or frail 
to the bathroom, and brushing your teeth. Though because of age. The category of IADLs includes 
often performed perfunctorily, such activities make less personal activities, such as shopping, cooking, 
it possible for you to live independently. If you were and doing laundry (Katz et al., 1963). Generally, 
unable to do them, you would likely need some IADLs are more physically demanding than ADLs. 
help from others; in other words, you would lose Health insurance companies often use these two 
some measure of self-sufficiency. Self-sufficiency classifications to gauge a patient’s level of disability 
and personal comfort are also aided by other and determine the type of health support to cover. 
activities that may not be essential for survival or For example, an older person might not qualify to 
independent living, such as cleaning your home, collect on long-term health care insurance cover- 
washing the dishes, ironing clothes, and driving age unless a therapist documents that he or she is 
a Car. unable to perform two or more ADLs. 

Physical and occupational therapists help people Of course, self-sufficiency may also depend on 
who, because of injury or disease, have lost the performing some physical activities around one’s 
ability to perform important tasks of daily life that home that are more complicated than typical ADLs 
enable self-sufficiency. Typically, therapists divide and IADLs and may demand more energy. Exam- 
self-sufficient physical activity into two major ples include home maintenance activities such 

Pe 
Cooking is an example of an instrumental activity of daily living. 
Calvin Chan Wai Meng/E+/Getty Images 



Chapter 2 |I mportance of the Physical Activity Experience 

as shoveling snow, fixing an automobile, painting 
one’s home, and repairing electrical fixtures. All 
of these activities require relatively high levels of 
metabolic energy, skill, or both. 

calASO ALN IS 
To live functional, independent lives, we must perform 
activities of daily living (ADLs) and instrumental activ- 
ities of daily living (IADLs). 

Sphere of Self-Expression 
The urge to express our feelings is one of the 
most basic human instincts. All of us would like 
to demonstrate, in one way or another, what is 
unique about us, what makes us special. In doing 
so, of course, we face limitations. People often 
hesitate to express themselves in speech, and few 
possess the talent of a poet, songwriter, or visual 
artist. We can, however, give outlet to our feelings 
by moving our bodies. 

In fact, the way in which we move can speak 
volumes about how we feel. We walk rapidly and 
with a spring in our step when we feel happy but 
move in a slow, plodding manner when we feel 
sad. We jump up and down or dance for joy, stretch 
our arms overhead in elation, hang our heads in 
sorrow, and clap our hands in appreciation. In these 
ways and many others, we use body movements to 
express Our emotional states. Moreover, our body Lifting your arms in celebration is an example of physical 
movements seem to be wired directly to our emo- activity in the sphere of self-expression. 

tions so that changes in our movements may occur © Human Kinetics 

without voluntary effort on our part. Although such 
movements point to intriguing aspects of human 
identity, they do not meet our technical definition 
of physical activity because they do not involve BeKEVPON See  es 
deliberate or voluntary movement directed toward We use physical activity in the form of gestures as a 
a goal. means of communication and expression, either in 

Many times, however, we use movement delib- combination with or in place of words. 
erately in order to express a feeling or mood or 
to convey another type of message. Have you ever 
thought about how much you depend on physical Sphere of Work 
activity to help you communicate when you are 
talking? By using gestures, hand signals, facial For most of us, work constitutes a considerable 

expressions, and changes in body posture, we can portion of our total life experience, and it always 

deliberately and intentionally emphasize key ele- involves at least a small degree of physical activity. 

ments or emotions in verbal messages. Even when What different kinds of work have you done in your 

standing, our posture may send signals about our life? Have you worked as a construction laborer, 

feelings or attitudes. We also use physical activity a truck loader for a shipping company, a lawn 

intentionally to express our feelings and emotions maintenance technician, a pizza delivery person, a 

in dance, religious liturgy, and various other cer- house painter, a server at a restaurant, a lifeguard, 
a kitchen worker, an office assistant, or perhaps a 

emonies. 



Mm 26 Introduction to Kinesiology 

checkout person at a store? What kinds of physical Integrating Physical Activity 
activity have your jobs required? Into Our Working Lives 

In thinking about the answer to this question, 
you probably recognized that the type and intensity The amount of physical activity required for per- 

of physical activity can vary enormously from job forming a job will generally continue to decrease 

to job. For example, a checkout clerk and a con- as workplaces increasingly adopt technological 

struction laborer both engage in physical activity, innovation. In addition, current workforce pro- 

but they are active in different ways. Moreover, jections suggest that the jobs of the future are 

although you may easily recognize the importance much more likely to be found in the service and 

of physical activity to a pizza delivery person or managerial sectors, in which the physical activity 

truck loader, it may be a little harder to appreciate requirements tend to be more modest than they 

the equal importance of physical activity (though are in manufacturing, construction, and agricul- 

of a different kind) to the work of an administra- ture. Furthermore, workers in the United States 

tive assistant, accountant, computer consultant, or continue to log more working hours than do their 

graphic artist. Yet physical actions such as using counterparts in other countries; in fact, according 

a computer, though not strenuous, require precise to one report, Americans work about 1 hour more 

positioning and movement of the limbs and fingers. each day than do European workers (Bick et al., 

Throughout recorded history, societies have 2016). Add to this scenario the fact that before the 

associated manual labor and its high demand for 2020 coronavirus pandemic, the average commute 

physical activity with lower socioeconomic status to work had increased to 46 minutes per day in 

while according higher status to managerial and the United States, and it is clear that U.S. workers 

supervisory jobs that require little physical activity. may not have the time required to exercise daily 

Yet some low-status jobs that require high levels (Carroll, 2007). This reality has led some health 

of physical activity may also offer a health bonus scientists to recommend that people put more 

for workers. Specifically, increased levels of some emphasis on integrating physical activity into their 

forms of physical activity may ward off certain working lives—for example, by parking their cars 
diseases associated with physical inactivity (some- farther from their offices or by walking up the stairs 
times called hypokinetic or low-physical-activity rather than taking the elevator (Dong et al., 2004). 
diseases). For example, when one list of the 10 With such concerns in mind, one innovation 

worst jobs in 2010 included the position of mail car- involves the use of adjustable desks in the workplace 
rier partly because of its physical demands, the list to enable people to work in different positions. 
discounted the health bonus that carriers receive Sitting at a desk for extended periods not only 
from their daily walking activity (Strieber, 2010). increases the possibility of spine and hip problems 
Similarly, a classic study of drivers and conductors but also has been related to such conditions as 
of English double-decker buses revealed that the elevated blood pressure, high blood sugar, and the 
drivers, who were mostly sedentary (and held the accumulation of excessive fat around the waist. 
easier, higher-status job), had a higher incidence Ergonomic engineers have responded to this crisis 
of heart disease than did the conductors (the low- by designing desks and desk-mounted lifts that can 
er-status workers), who were constantly in motion be elevated to different positions that range from 
as they walked up and down stairs (Morris et al., sitting to standing height. Some kinesiology schol- 
1953). These findings suggest that the types of ars have explored active desks, which integrate a 
work valued highly by a society—often those with workspace above a cycle or treadmill so workers can 
a low amount and intensity of physical activity— safely expend energy and hold less static postures. 
ironically may not be conducive to good health. During the pandemic of 2020, when many 

office employees worked from home instead of 
at their usual workplaces, some found it easier to 

*eKEY PON e ee get physical activity during the day because they 

As technology continues to shape the character of work, could take walks in their neighborhoods. Others 

the amount of physical activity required on the job is found themselves working from their apartments, 

likely to decrease, thus placing workers at higher risk and without the ability to walk in green spaces, 
they had to find innovative 

for diseases brought on by physical inactivity. ways to be physically 
active. Some followed online exercise programs, 
while others devised creative ways to get their steps 
in or even run marathons in small spaces. (One 



Chapter 2| Importance of the Physical Activity Experience 27 Zz 

Adjustable desks allow employees to move easily between sitting and standing positions. 
© Human Kinetics 

man ran circles in his yard until he had completed or tables, redesigning the shapes of workstations, 
a full marathon!) or modifying the order in which workers grasp 

components in the assembly process. Ergonomists 

Physical Activity, Efficiency, are usually expert observers of the movements 
used in various kinds of work, and they base their 

and Injury in the Workplace recommendations for change on critical analysis of 
Professionals who specialize in improving efficiency, those movements. They often look for risks inher- 
safety, and well-being among workers are called ent in the work. In order to make such analyses, 
ergonomists or human factors engineers. The they require thorough knowledge of the structure 
particular roles of these specialists continue to be of the body, as well as a complete understanding 
discussed by experts; some claim that the study of of how the body moves. 
human factors is more theoretical and relies more Productivity in the workplace suffers its greatest 
heavily on psychology, whereas ergonomics is more decline when workers are injured and miss work. 
practical and relies more on anatomy and biome- This is especially troublesome when an injury 
chanics. The trend, however, is for the two terms results directly from performing the physical activ- 
to be used synonymously (Kroemer et al., 1994). ity needed to do the job. Many such injuries involve 

Ergonomists, or human factors engineers, apply musculoskeletal disorders that result from overex- 
their engineering knowledge along with psychol- ertion or repetitive motion. Women are particularly 

ogy and kinesiology (i.e., anatomy, biomechanics, susceptible; they suffer an estimated 63 percent of 
and exercise physiology) to study the demands all work-related repetitive motion injuries (National 
of various jobs and tools. These engineers then Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 2000). 
recommend certain changes to make in the move- Among all workers, the incidence rate increased 4 
ments used to perform the task, in the work envi- percent from 2009 to 2010 for musculoskeletal inju- 
ronment, or in the training programs provided to ries due to overexertion that resulted in days away 

workers. In many cases, workers’ efficiency can from work; the rate increased 10 percent, however, 

be improved markedly through simple measures among nurses and orderlies, who often lift and 

such as rearranging the location of objects to be transport patients (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 

assembled, adjusting the heights of workers’ chairs 2011). Overexertion injuries result from the appli- 



me 28 Introduction to Kinesiology 

cation of maximal force by the body, usually when occurring everywhere! Physical therapists teach 

the worker is either physically incapable of such patients how to walk; faculty members at dental 

exertion (e.g., due to weak back muscles) or poorly and medical schools teach students how to per- 

prepared from a positional standpoint (e.g., lifts form the intricate movements required in surgery; 

without bending the knees). Most of these injuries fathers and mothers teach their children how to 

occur when a worker is lifting, pushing, pulling, dribble a soccer ball; ergonomists train employees 

holding, carrying, or turning an object (USDHHS, in new assembly or material handling techniques; 

1997). However, even sitting for long periods at a American Red Cross staff teach would-be lifeguards 

desk can lead to musculoskeletal injury. how to rescue swimmers; and senior automobile 

Cumulative trauma disorders result from mechanics train new mechanics to use tools. Any- 
repeated physical stress in joints and muscles that where physical activity is important, you will find 
damages tendons, nerves, and skeletal structures, some form of instruction, whether formal or infor- 

eventually requiring rehabilitative therapy. These mal. Indeed, instruction in physical activity may be 
overuse injuries can afflict assembly line workers who as universal as physical activity itself. 
package items and therefore perform the same arm, 
hand, finger, and trunk movements several hundred Instruction in Sport and Exercise 
(or even several thousand) times per day. Even the 

Not so long ago, instruction in sport and exercise 
small range of motion involved in typing can pro- 

was limited largely to public school and college 
duce cumulative trauma disorder like carpal tunnel 

physical education programs, municipal recreation 
syndrome in susceptible people. Although our bodies 

programs, and the military. Today, however, the 
are remarkably durable and adaptable, sometimes 
work asks too much of them, whereupon they suffer ongoing explosion of interest in learning about sport 

deterioration or collapse. Kinesiology scholars often and exercise has led to an expansion of instruction 

research work activities to improve performance and beyond the walls of schools and colleges. Sport and 

reduce risk of injury. One area where kinesiology fitness instruction is now offered at gyms, sport 

researchers have been effective in reducing risk of and fitness centers, resorts and commercial spas, 

work injuries is in higher-risk tactical athlete careers hospitals, ice rinks, riding stables, dance studios, 

(e.g., firefighting, law enforcement, military). martial arts centers, and private clubs (e.g., tennis, 
golf, swimming). In addition, millions of children 
are taught how to play sports by their parents or 

Sphere of Education older siblings and by the coaches of youth sport 
teams. Physical activity instruction is also provided 

Education plays a crucial role both in preserving cul- 
by companies that specialize in working with young 

tural traditions and in providing the knowledge and 
athletes, summer sport camps offered by famous 

skills that enable societies to progress. All phases of 
coaches, and age-specific swimming and gymnastics 

education involve physical activity—for example, the 
eye movements required in reading; the wrist, finger, schools (for more on these options, see chapter 14). 

and arm movements required in writing; and the Even adults, who as a group used to shy away 

more expansive forms of physical activity required in from sport instruction, now seek it out in consid- 

learning how to play a musical instrument or operate erable numbers, and they pay as much as $100 

a power saw. In almost every form of educational per hour for lessons with top specialists in activi- 

program, the aim is to change the behavior of those ties such as skiing, scuba diving, golf, and fitness 

being instructed; for our purposes here, that means training. In addition, many large corporations now 

changing their physical activity patterns. provide their employees with recreation programs, 
which often include basic instruction in exercise 
and various sports. Instruction offered through 

ERE PON oe ee the media has also become a huge business. For 
The education sphere includes that aspect of life in example, the Golf Channel Academy offers instruc- 

which we seek to learn new skills or knowledge; in this tion 24 hours a day, how-to books and videos are 

process, physical activity usually plays an important role. widely available for every conceivable sport, and 
sport-focused specialty publications include regular 
instructional features. 

Although we are most interested in educational This interest in learning how to participate 
programs in sport, exercise, and recreation, they in sport and exercise is coupled with a growing 
form only the tip of the instructional iceberg. Look demand for knowledge about how to live a health- 
around and you will see physical activity instruction ful lifestyle. At the same time, corporate managers, 



Chapter 2 |I mportance of the Physical Activity Experience 22 Zz 

eae ios t 

Sport instruction is an example of physical activity in the sphere of education. 

Trevor Williams/DigitalVision/ Getty Images 

keenly aware of the economic advantages of having patterns and learning of large segments of the popu- 
a healthy workforce, are making instructional pro- lation, they have attracted the attention of all physical 
grams available at worksites, often in collaboration activity professionals, as well as public health officials. 
with their health maintenance organizations or For this reason, you as a future physical activity pro- 
health insurers. Typically, these programs use a fessional should appreciate the potential benefits and 
variety of methods to integrate theoretical informa- pitfalls of school-based physical activity programs. 
tion about exercise, nutrition, and body mechanics More information on the latest national standards for 
with practical experiences in the exercise room. physical education is presented in chapter 13. 

Physical Education 
KEY: POULIN Vises oe eee 

Although instruction in sport, fitness, and exercise 
Physical education is the only near-universal program 

now takes place in myriad formal and informal 
of sport and exercise instruction available to young 

settings, it is still most visible and accessible in 
people throughout the world. For this reason, it should 

the physical education classes offered as part 
of the school curriculum in most countries (see be of the highest quality possible. 

chapter 13). The U.S. educational system is based 
on the belief that a democracy thrives best when The material emphasized by physical education 
its citizens are provided with a free and accessible teachers in their classes is influenced by trends 
program of education. Moreover, instruction in and forces in society. This influence makes sense 
sport, exercise, and fundamental movements has because public education must be responsive to 
long been considered an integral component of the needs of society. For example, in the early 
the educational enterprise. 20th century in the United States, two societal 

In this section, we give brief attention to the life developments—the growing popularity of sport 
experience that you probably knew as “gym class,” and the burgeoning interest among educators in 
which is referred to as physical education by physical the phenomenon of play as an educational expe- 
activity professionals. Because such programs hold 

rience—contributed to the move by schools to 
enormous potential to influence the physical activity 



Mg 30 Introduction to Kinesiology 

begin using sport in the physical education cur- Philosophers have struggled to describe this state 

riculum, replacing the formal systems of exercise at least as far back as the ancient Greeks, but none 

and gymnastics that had been typical at the close have done so with complete success. In its purest 

of the 19th century. Today, in contrast, fitness has state, leisure is a feeling that all is well with the 

assumed a renewed importance, and many schools world—a feeling of supreme contentment. It can 

are including fitness activities in their programs. provoke celebration and wonder, creativity and 
discovery, excitement and reflection. Pieper (1952) 
described leisure as the “basis of culture” and as 

Sphere of Leisure the psychological and spiritual disposition that is 

Physical activity also plays a prominent role in the fundamental prerequisite for the great works 

leisure, which is not the same thing as free time of art, music, theater, and philosophy. 

(discussed later), though most laypeople think of In order to use our free time to achieve a state of 

it that way. What do you do in your free time— leisure, we must divorce ourselves psychologically 

play sports, exercise, read, attend concerts, watch from other aspects of life, which is a challenging 

television, hike? The term Jeisure pursuits is often task for many people, especially when smartphones 

used synonymously with play or recreation. How- keep them constantly connected with work and 

ever, leisure is more a state of mind than simply other distractions. Moreover, we must choose an 

free time. Sometimes we choose to work in our activity that is conducive to a state of leisure; for 

free time. Have you ever given up an opportunity instance, though many of us choose to watch tele- 

to spend a summer weekend (free time) camping vision or use social media during our free time, 

or at the beach in order to work an extra shift at these and other hollow free-time experiences that 

your job? If so, was your work time “free time”? merely fill our idle hours are not leisure experi- 

As you can see, the terms /eisure and free time ences. They do not challenge us, stimulate our 

are a bit more ambiguous than they first appear. Can imaginations, or help us reveal our identities in 

you really work in your leisure time? You may have the way that true leisure experiences do. Thus, if 

noticed that some people play softball or soccer with we are to convert free time into leisure time, we 

an intensity that seems to be anything but leisurely. must use it for participating in activities that tend 

Conversely, can people play (i.e., be at leisure) while to nourish and maintain the state of being known 

they work? Perhaps. For example, artists, novelists, as leisure. Figure 2.1 highlights the participation 

and professors sometimes seem to approach their rates in selected leisure physical activities. 

work almost as if it were a leisure experience. Thus, a 
good place to start in our examination of the leisure Sphere of Health 
sphere of physical activity experience is to clarify 
what we mean by free time and leisure. Attending to personal and community health needs 

can consume a large part of our daily experience. 

Distinguishing Leisure From Free Time For example, we dispose of our garbage, ensure 
that we drink clean water and eat proper foods, 

When we disengage from our everyday lives and 
and visit doctors when we are ill—all of which 

carve out minutes and hours to do what we want 
enables us to be productive citizens and enjoy life. 

to do, we often refer to this period as free time. At 
To varying degrees, these and other health-related 

such times, we are free from our everyday routines 
endeavors require physical activity. However, phys- 

and free to do what we want to do—when, where, 
ical activity also intersects with this sphere in a 

and with whom we choose. 
much more direct way. We now possess scientific 
evidence showing that when physical activity is 

SE POUN oe a a performed in the right amount and with sufficient 
frequency, it contributes to our health in many 

Leisure is a state of being, and free-time activities can important ways. 
help us attain this state. For example, large-muscle We know, for example, that moderate to vigor- 
physical activities (e.g., sport, exercise) can help us ous physical activity performed regularly and at 
nourish and maintain a leisure disposition. safe levels almost always results in health benefits. 

We also know that the payoffs do not necessarily 
depend on performing painful exercise routines or 

In contrast, theorists describe leisure not as free long runs. In fact, it has been known for decades 
time but as “a state of being” (De Grazia, 1962). that most health and longevity benefits can be 



Chapter 2| Importance of the Physical Activity Experience 31 

Total U.S. Participation Rates 
80% 

U.S. Population, Ages 6+ 

70% 

60% 

50% 

40% 
Percent 

30% 

20% 

10% 

9, 

Fitness Individual Outdoor Racquet Team Water Winter 
sports sports sports sports sports sports sports 

GEUSERY Participation rates in selected leisure activities; percentage of people aged 6 years or older (winter 
sports based on season). 

© Physical Activity Council / Sports Marketing Surveys USA 2020 

obtained through moderate and intermittent Too Much of a Good Thing? 
physical activity—for example, through sport par- 

Physical activity is a valuable contributor to healthy 
ticipation and physical activity performed as part 

living; it does not, however, provide unqualified 
of work. It is equally clear that the safest, most 

benefit. The fact that some physical activity is 
effective, and most efficient way to attain health 

good does not necessarily mean that more is 
benefits from physical activity is to participate in 

always better; to the contrary, some research has 
carefully designed programs supervised by kine- 

shown that excessive amounts of exercise may be 
siology professionals who are well versed in the 

damaging to one’s health. For example, long-term 
science of physical activity. As this fact continues 

endurance athletes often suffer from diminished 
to become better understood by the general public, 

function of the right ventricle; moreover, imme- 
the demand for highly trained fitness leaders and 

diately following a race, some have evidenced 
consultants will continue to increase. 

increases in cardiac enzymes that may play a role 
in clotting. Vigorous and adventure-based physical 

Physical Activity, Health, activities like rock climbing usually come at some 

and the Public Interest risk of injury. Figure 2.2 illustrates the numbers of 
acute injuries in young athletes worldwide. 

What is the public benefit when individuals main- 
Overexercise can also occur in other types of 

tain and improve their health through physical 
activity, including weight training, aerobics, and 

activity? Healthy people are vital to the national and 
repetitive motions in work settings. It can result in 

international economy. In 2014, U.S. health care 
stress fractures, strained muscles, inflamed tendons, 

spending increased by more than 5 percent (on top 
and psychological staleness. Sometimes the damage 

of 3 percent growth in 2013) to reach a total of $3 
brought on by long-term wear and tear, although 

trillion, or nearly $10,000 per person (Centers for 
more insidious, can be more traumatizing. Repeated 

Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2014). More recent 
injuries to the knees, fingers, wrists, hips, and backs 

data suggests that in 2020, health care spending 
can take their toll on athletes, not only in the weeks 

will eclipse $4 trillion with projections suggest- 
and months following an injury but also in later 

ing costs exceeding $6 trillion by 2028 (https:// 
years. For instance, years of pitching a baseball can 

www.advisory.com/daily-briefing/2020/04/03/ 
lead to rotator cuff injuries, and stress fractures are 

health-spending). A healthier populace can spend 
common among gymnasts. The most hazardous 

less on health care, leaving public funds available 
activities, however, are collision sports in which play- 

for other expenses in the public interest. 
ers deliberately or accidentally make contact with 
each other, such as American football. Kinesiology 



my3 2 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Football 394,350 

Basketball 389,610 

Soccer 172,470 
Baseball 119,810 
Softball 

Volleyball 

Wrestling | 

Cheerleading 

Gymnastics 
Track and field 24,910 

Gear2 ] Number of injuries among athletes aged 19 or under (estimates based on reports from hospital 
emergency rooms worldwide). 

Data from Safe Kids Worldwide (2015). 

research plays an important role in documenting best. In contrast, when players become spoilsports, 
risk and using evidence-based recommendations for give up, or cheat, the game falls apart. Do you think 
improving the safety of physical activities. sport in the United States has lost this respect and 

appreciation for the opponent? For what reasons 
do you think this? 

Sphere of Competition When we examine the spheres of physical activ- 

Competition itself is not an activity but an orga- ity experience, we can see that we rely on physical 

nizing principle for activity. It can either add to or activity every day, not only to survive but also to 

detract from the enjoyment of activity, but it usually lead full and rich lives. Surely, then, physical activ- 

increases one’s level of performance. For example, ity offers many practical benefits, though we do 

skipping stones on a pond can be an exciting expe- not seek these benefits through physical activity as 

rience for children; when they decide to see who much as we should. Having said this, it would be 

can skip a stone the farthest, the activity becomes misleading to leave you with the impression that 

even more exciting. As they become more intent on physical activity is important only because it is useful 

creating more or longer skips, their stone-skipping in achieving some end. To the contrary, it may be 

performances may also improve. Similarly, some as important to us for the special types of personal 

people thoroughly enjoy shooting baskets alone experience that it offers as for any concrete benefits 

on the playground or playing golf by themselves that we derive from participating. To put it simply, 

or in leisurely social contexts with friends, whereas our lives are enriched when we immerse ourselves 

others seek the peculiar kind of excitement that regularly in a variety of physical activity experiences. 

comes only from competition. The next sections will help you more fully appreciate 
the vital importance of physical activity and learn 
how physical activity professionals use it to serve 

Nature of Competition 
their students, clients, and patients. 

The word competition is derived from a Latin word 
meaning “to strive together,” but most of us think 
of it as striving against. We compete against oppo- Factors That Influence Kinds of 
nents. However, if you think about it, competition Experience in Physical Activity 
between teams or individuals also requires an 
element of cooperation or striving together. In fact, Because our potential for physical activity helps 
cooperation is necessary to hold the game together. us express what is unique about our humanity, it 
Competition at its best has been defined by sport might seem that each of us would naturally max- 
philosopher Robert Simon (2004) as “a mutual imize opportunities to engage in physical activity 
quest for excellence in the intelligent and directed and incorporate it into our lives. However, that isn’t 
use of athletic skills in the face of challenge” (p. 24). the case. Although it is natural for us to engage in 
Opponents who play their best help us to play our physical activity, relatively few of us are inclined to 



Chapter 2| Importance of the Physical Activity Experience 3 Zz 

Injuries Plague Football Players 

Few sports are more popular, more dangerous, or more likely to capture the imagination of North 
Americans than American football. Indeed, this sport illustrates the fact that it is sometimes 
difficult to objectively examine those aspects of our culture with which we are most familiar. 
According to the National Center for Catastrophic Sport Injury Research (Kucera et al., 2016), 
American football is associated with the highest number of injuries—and the most catastrophic 
injuries—of any sport. In 2015, football was directly responsible for seven fatalities, all of them 
among high school athletes. Although some observers may consider seven fatalities out of more 
than a million participants to be a tolerable number, such statistics provide little consolation for 
the families and friends of the athletes who were fatally injured. 

Moreover, recent media accounts have highlighted the terrible, lifelong damage incurred by many 
professional football players. Sports pages are filled with first-person accounts of former football 
players in their late 30s who cannot walk without assistance or are hampered by elbows that don’t 
work or fingers that have been broken so many times that they can no longer hold a cup of coffee. 
Perhaps the greatest concern, however, involves the scourge of concussions suffered by football 
players. The disorienting effects of a hard collision—often casually described by sportscasters as 
“having your bell rung”—occur when the brain collides with the interior of the skull and injures vital 
nerve tissue. The effects of repeated head trauma (often glorified by players as “head banging”) 
are Cumulative, and those who have spent many years playing the game sometimes suffer per- 
manent disability—for example, dementia pugilistica, a brain disorder more commonly associated 
with boxers. In addition, postmortems have revealed that 87 of 91 deceased National Football 
League (NFL) players whose bodies were examined had chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), 
a disease associated with repeated traumatic blows to the head. As a result of these findings 
and public pressure, the NFL now mandates that teams follow a concussion protocol, and it has 
made some rule changes to protect players from head-to-head contact. 

The problem is not limited to the professional ranks. According to the National Collegiate Athletic 
Association (NCAA, 2010), concussions account for more than 7 percent of injuries to college foot- 
ball players. In addition, increasing attention is being paid to high school football, where, because 
the athletes’ brains are still developing, catastrophic head injuries can have even more serious 
and long-lasting effects. More generally, every 3 minutes, a child is seen in the emergency room 
for a sport-related concussion (Safe Kids Worldwide, 2015), and the long-term effects of repeated 
“minor” head injuries are difficult to assess because the symptoms may not appear for years. 

1. Is American football a body-threatening sport? Is it a violent sport? 

2. If so, what factors contribute to the violence? 

3. What recommendations would you make to reduce the injury rate in football? 

4 . What implications do these issues carry for kinesiology majors who plan a career in athletic 
training or sports medicine? In coaching? Sport management? Sport psychology? 

do it regularly and in its more vigorous forms. In KEY POINT 

fact, an enormous disconnect sone Sects vie Although we possess a unique facility for performing, 
Sica ‘ A 5 “| ite a 

Sue ee poe 2 es ernie ‘ Bat Sf planning, and implementing physical activity experi- 
av1O atterns. LiKe WISE, : A 

RUNEATS eeG a iia ae ences in order to improve our performance, many of us 
incli to t full potential for devel- Seis 

ie a eae eee ayaa Dervities aW e are not inclined to explore this potential to the fullest. 

know that when people are competent in a sport, 

they enjoy engaging in it during their leisure time, Why this paradox? Why do many of us fail to 

yet relatively few people devote themselves to the explore to its fullest potential something so fun- 

considerable practice necessary to reach even a damental to our human nature and so beneficial 
moderate, much less an expert level of competence. 



me 34 Introduction to Kinesiology 

to us? In contrast, why do some people engage Parents 
in physical activity throughout their lives? This is When you were a child, did your parents lead a phys- 
one of the most pressing questions confronting ically active life, or were they largely sedentary? If 
the physical activity professions today, and, as you they modeled an active lifestyle—for example, taking 
will see when you study chapter 7, it is an area you with them to their workouts at an exercise facil- 
of study that is central to exercise psychology. ity, taking a daily walk or run in your neighborhood, 
Unfortunately, there are no simple answers. Many or avidly playing tennis or squash—then perhaps 
factors in our lives encourage us to explore phys- they can take some credit for the fact that you are 
ical activity, and many factors discourage us from an active person today. If, on the other hand, they 
doing so. The barriers that keep us from living were “couch potatoes” who avoided sport, exercise, 
physically active lives include lack of time, lack of and other physical activity, then you may have had 
access to an exercise or sport facility, and lack of a to resist their adverse influence. From a research 
safe environment in which to be physically active. standpoint, however, it remains unclear how strongly 
However, these aren’t the only factors to consider. children’s levels of physical activity are affected by 
Let’s look briefly at how two other major factors their parents’ levels. Researchers have found, for 
may affect the type and extent of our physical example, that the activity levels of children who 
activity experiences: our social environments and were participating in an obesity treatment program 
our personal circumstances (see figure 2.3). bore a remarkable correspondence to the activity 

levels of their parents (Kalakanis et al., 2001). Yet 
Social Environment other researchers have found no correlation between 

The people with whom you regularly interact can the levels of engagement of parents and children in 

affect the types and amounts of physical activity physical activity (Jago et al., 2010). 

experiences that you pursue, both as a child and Even if parents’ participation in physical activity 

as an adult. As a child, you may have received does not exert a strong influence on the physi- 

substantial social support for engaging in certain cal activity levels of their children, encouraging 

kinds of physical activity, thus causing you to be them—especially preschoolers and adolescents—to 

physically active in your younger years. Similarly, be physically active is likely to make a difference. 

among both young and middle-aged men and This is a good point for future parents to keep in 

women, the amount of vigorous exercise that a mind. More specifically, merely showing support 

person undertakes is influenced strongly by friend- for children’s physical activity by transporting them 

ships and social alliances (King et al., 1992; Sallis to physical activity settings or helping organize an 

& Hovell, 1990). For example, if your girlfriend activity (e.g., serving as a Little League coach or 

or boyfriend has a physically active lifestyle, you cheerleading sponsor) may increase the probability 

probably feel encouraged to be physically active that they will be physically active (U.S. Department 

too. Thus, although each of us is ultimately respon- of Health and Human Services, 1996). 

sible for our decisions about physical activity, our Researchers also have yet to find a strong link 

dispositions about it can be affected by the people between one’s level of physical activity in younger 

with whom we associate. years and one’s level later in life. For example, 

Personal circumstances Social environment 
Geography be Parents 
Local physical activity culture Peers 
Economic considerations Teachers or coaches 
Personal attributes 

Quality and quantity of > 
physical activity experiences — 
SERGE STS 

GTLEZI Many factors influence our decisions about whether to engage and persist in physical activity experiences. 



Chapter 2| Importance of the Physical Activity Experience 35 

participating in school or college sport does not Peers 
appear to influence the amount of physical activity 

Your physical activity decisions may also be influ- 
that one engages in as an adult (Brill et al., 1989: 

enced by the extent of your friends’ involvement in 
Cauley et al., 1991; Cleland et al., 2012; Dishman & 

physical activity. Do you hang around people who 
Sallis, 1994). In fact, you may be familiar with some- 

like to be physically active? If so, you are likely to 
one who was a star athlete in college yet became 

be physically active as well. In fact, some research- 
physically inactive after graduation, just as you 

ers believe that the physical activity patterns of 
may know someone who did not lead a physically 

peers may be as important as those of family in 
active life as a child but became an avid adherent 

determining whether a person becomes involved 
of exercise and sport in later years. Obviously, we 

in sport (Kirby et al., 2011). 
have much to learn about this potential connection. 

As you grew older, did your peers become more 
Until a more complete picture emerges, however, 

physically active or more inactive? Unfortunately, 
it seems best to ensure that constructive physical 

the statistical probability is that your peer group 
activity experiences are integrated into the early 

became less active. For example, only 29 percent 
years of development. 

Do Inactive Parents Produce Inactive Children? 

Researchers at the University of Bristol wanted to know whether physically active parents produce 
physically active children. To find out, they conducted a study that examined physical activity patterns 
among 6th graders and their parents from 40 primary schools (Jago et al., 2010). Specifically, they 
assessed levels of parent and child physical activity, as well as inactive time, through the use of 
accelerometers, which are small devices worn by subjects while they go about their daily activities; 
the devices provide reasonably reliable measures of physical activity. The investigators found no 
relationship between parents’ and children’s physical activity levels, but they did discover some- 
thing very significant. The more parents watched TV, the more their children watched as well. For 
girls, the relative probability of watching more than 4 hours per day was nearly four times higher if 
their parents watched 2 to 4 hours per day as compared with girls whose parents watched fewer 
than 2 hours per day. For boys, the difference was even more pronounced. The chance of watching 
more than 4 hours per day for boys was more than 10 times higher if the parents watched more 
than 4 hours per day as compared with boys whose parents watched fewer than 2 hours per day. 

These findings show that although parents may not directly influence their children’s physical 
activity patterns, they can exert a direct influence on their children’s sedentary behavior. This 
finding should concern kinesiologists because research has shown that men who report more 
than 23 hours per week of sedentary activity are 64 percent more likely to die from heart disease 
than are those who are sedentary for fewer than 11 hours per week, even though many of these 
more sedentary men exercised regularly (Warren et al., 2010). 

What Factors Have Influenced Your Physical Activity Patterns? 

What leisure-time or competitive physical activities did you participate in as a child? Did you play 
soccer, football, or baseball? Did you take private dance or gymnastics lessons? Did you ride a 

bike, climb trees, or skateboard with your friends in the neighborhood? Did physical education 

motivate you to engage in physical activity outside of class? Did you participate in community-based 

sport and recreation programs? Do you think that these early physical activities influenced your 

engagement in physical activity as an adult? Do you see similarities in the general types of physical 

activities that you pursued as a young child and those that you pursue now? What factors have 

contributed to your decision to continue (or discontinue) engaging in these activities? 



aa 36 Introduction to Kinesiology 

of high school students surveyed had participated al., 1983). Physical education teachers and coaches 
in 60 minutes of physical activity on all of the 7 are influential because they are positioned to either 
days just prior to the survey (Centers for Disease confirm or disconfirm a young person’s sense of 
Control and Prevention [CDC], 2012). competence in an activity. In other words, a parent’s 

For example, if your peer group is immersed in remark that a child performed well in a soccer game 
online social networking, playing video games, or may encourage the child to continue developing 
other sedentary pursuits, then you are likely to lead his or her skills, but a similar remark from a coach 

an inactive lifestyle as well, rather than using vigor- is likely to exert more influence. 
ous physical activities as the nucleus of your social 
life. As you grow older, peer groups may continue to 
affect your physical activity decisions. For example, KEY POINT Ese E 
if you are married, your spouse and your spouse’s The people closest to you—including your parents, 
friends are likely to influence your decisions about peers, coaches, and teachers—influence the kinds 
whether to participate or not participate in phys- and amounts of experience you have with a particular 
ical activity (Loy et al., 1978). More generally, the 

physical activity, especially when you are young. 
predispositions of your relatives, friends, and social 
groups regarding physical activity will probably 
continue, indirectly but predictably, to influence Of course, physical education teachers and 
your decisions throughout your life. coaches can also create social environments that 

discourage young people from seeking out physical 
Teachers and Coaches activity experiences. In this regard, teachers and 
If you were an athlete in school or club sports, then coaches may act as gatekeepers to the physically 
your coaches—of youth sport teams, junior high active life for countless children each year. Thus, 
school teams, and high school varsity teams—prob- it is no exaggeration to say that the behavior of a 
ably had a significant effect on your decisions about teacher or coach may exert profound and lifelong 
physical activity. Athletes tend to associate their positive or negative effects on a student’s physical 
participation in sport with the earlier influence of activity experience. 
coaches, especially during adolescence (Ebihara et 

Dann Baker 
Dann Baker is a world-renowned 
teacher and student of karate. Dann 
served in the Air Force before earning 
his bachelor’s and master’s degrees 
in kinesiology. Through hard and 
consistent practice, he has earned 
second-, third-, and ninth-degree 
black belts in several styles of karate 
and has won numerous national and 
international championships. Having 
just retired at 72, he continues to 
teach karate instructors all over the 
world, and he is trying to qualify 
again for the Boston Marathon. 
Learning through experience and 
repetition with a skilled mentor is © Dann Baker 
a time-honored tradition in martial 
arts instruction. 



Chapter 2 |I mportance of the Physical Activity Experience 37 

Personal Circumstances others. However, Our own perceptions, feelings, 

The amount an and decisions lie very much within our control and 
d kinds of physical activity that one 

experiences greatly affect our physical activity patterns. 
can be affected not only by one’s social 

environment but also by personal circumstances, 
such as the availability and accessibility of facilities Ways in Which Experience Can Affect 
and play spaces (Garcia et al. 1995; Zakarian et 
al., 1994). One important factor is geography. In Physical Activity 
addition, the weather can dictate the availability Think back to a form of physical activity in which 
of appropriate sport environments. For instance, you had a special interest. How did your experience 
people who live in colder climates are more likely with this activity affect your capacity to perform 
to develop competency in skiing, skating, hunting, it On successive occasions? If, for example, the 
hiking, and fishing than in swimming or golf. On activity involved volleyball skills, then the effects 
the other hand, locations characterized by warm, of your accumulated experiences were probably 
sunny days tend to encourage jogging, in-line most evident in the form of changes in your ability 
skating, and walking. to perform the movement sequences associated 

In some cases, certain sports are also empha- with serving, setting, or spiking. If the activity was 
sized by local cultural traditions. In the United cardiorespiratory training, then the effects of your 
States, for instance, high school football is uniquely accumulated experiences may have manifested 
important in western Pennsylvania, Florida, and themselves not so much in changes in the nature 
Texas, whereas boys’ wrestling and girls’ basketball of your movements but in your improved capacity 
are popular in Iowa. In many inner cities, basket- to perform the activity for longer periods at greater 
ball is a cultural tradition, owing at least partly to intensity. These examples illustrate the two fun- 
the fact that space isn’t available for sports such damental effects of physical activity experience: 
as baseball and football. In other cities, however, the development of skill through practice and the 
the most popular sport may be soccer, or football development of physical capacity. 
as it is called in most of the world. These effects of physical activity experience can 

Economics and personal attributes may also be conceptualized on a continuum (see figure 2.4). 
affect participation in physical activity. Activities All physical activity experiences contribute to both 
that require expensive equipment may be easy to skill and physical capacity, but the particular mix 
participate in for some people but out of reach for of the two depends on many factors that can be 

Primary 
quality 

of activity 

Type of 
experience ao 
emphasized Training 

Primary 
core 

effect of ROO BO BION SI EES 

HO EAM Conditioning Motor learning 

Examples y Fa 

rf S 
Jumping Sawing Blocking an Handspring Basketball Tennis Golf putt Video 

jack a board opponent dribble serve game 

Ge RI The nature of improvement in physical activity depends on the types of physical activity experience 
and the relative importance of skill and physical capacity. 



i 38 Introduction to Kinesiology 

modified by the performer or by a kinesiology pro- change in the sequence of movements that we use. 
fessional. Movement experiences that emphasize To see this principle in action, carefully examine 

training result in relatively greater conditioning, the two photos presented in figure 2.5. In the first 
which improves physical capacity. In contrast, photo, the youngster locks shoulders, elbows, 

movement experiences that emphasize practice and wrists in an effort to control the movement, 
result in relatively greater learning of motor skills but this approach limits how much power can be 
or coordination. generated. In contrast, the more advanced player, 

shown in the second photo, rotates the hips, trunk, 

Learning, Practice, and Skill shoulders, elbows, and wrists independently, thus 
allowing her to generate much more force. 

Although physical activity is fundamental to Most people who engage in physical activity 
human life, we do not come into the world readily want to improve their performance, whether that 
equipped to perform it. Our prenatal development means performing faster, more forcefully, for a 
may endow us with an innate ability to move, but longer time, or more skillfully. The only way to 
in order to develop control over our movements make such improvements is to expose oneself 
we must have experience. For example, newborns systematically to appropriate physical activity 
spend a lot of time kicking their legs and waving experiences. Such experiences enable people 
their arms; these aimless and spontaneous move- enrolled in fitness programs to become stronger or 
ments occur without prompting or encouragement to increase their cardiorespiratory endurance. They 
from parents. In order to convert these sponta- also help athletes become more skillful, dancers 
neous and automatic movements into conscious more graceful, and factory workers and military 
physical activity, much experience and maturation personnel more efficient. 
are required. This section of the chapter explores Throughout life, we continue to confront the 
improvement in physical activities through the challenge of assembling sequences of movements 
kinesiology concepts of learning, practice, and skill. and body positions in order to accomplish specific 

Think back to a time when you were first tasks. Activities that place a premium on efficient, 
learning some physical activity. It is likely that coordinated motor responses are called motor 
your movements were jerky and inefficient. With skills. Although activities such as threading a 
practice, however, they became smoother, allowing needle, performing a cartwheel, pitching a baseball, 
you to be not only more accurate but also more and typing a letter are all motor skills, each one 
forceful. This process usually involves an important 

places distinctly different demands on our percep- 

= ae 2 

GeMTSAA (a) Physical activity experience leads to (b) more accurate and faster movements. 
© Human Kinetics 



Chapter 2| Importance of the Physical Activity Experience 2 zz 

tual and motor processing systems. The general comes from systematic review studies, specifically 
quality that underlies the performance of voluntary meta-analyses that statistically combine all the 
movements is called skill, which is reflected in the results of studies on a topic to provide an estimate 
efficiency and accuracy with which one can attain of overall effect or change. One such meta-analysis 
the goal of a motor skill. examined deliberate practice in many motor skills 

Becoming a skilled mover is a never-ending (games, music, sports, education, and professions). 
process of gaining more and more control over Macnamara, Hambrick, and Oswald (2014) in 
one’s motor system by gradually refining the neuro- their meta-analysis found that deliberate practice 
muscular systems through performance experience. accounted for only 1 to 26 percent of the variance 
The type of performance experience required to do in motor performance (see the Research and Evi- 
this is known as practice. Laypersons tend to think dence-Based Practice in Kinesiology sidebar Nature 
of practice as merely an endless repetition of the vs. Nurture). This means practice is important, but 
same movements by rote (practice make perfect, other factors (instruction, genetics, etc.) combined 
right?), but that isn’t how it works. Practice of motor to account for much more (about 75 percent) of the 
skills, especially during early learning, involves a variance in developing expertise in motor skills. 
lot of cognition. That is, it involves higher brain 
functions and integration of spinal neural activity Importance of Cognitive Processing 
as well as muscular action; in fact, muscular action 

is merely the result of these higher cognitive pro- The importance of cognitive processes in early 

cesses. Practice is a deliberate effort to “get it right” skill learning should not blind us to the fact that 

by modifying the erroneous movements we make learning can also proceed on an unconscious 

in early trials and revising our cognitive plans for or tacit level. For example, one may be able to 

moving or experimenting in later trials. With each improve one’s performance (i.e., reaction time) 

practice trial, we vary the level of force or direc- in responding rapidly to stimuli that appear in a 

tion of our movements, adopt new strategies, and complex temporal pattern yet be unable to explain 

analyze feedback from our movements so that we what that pattern is. Similarly, catching a fly ball 

can, for example, throw a ball farther or more accu- in baseball is an extraordinarily complex skill, and 

rately. This process is why one scientist referred to many components of this action are achieved at an 

practice as “a particular type of repetition without implicit (anconscious) level. Indeed, a young child 

repetition” (Bernstein, 1967, p. 134). can learn, implicitly, the movements that allow her 

There are no shortcuts for developing motor to catch the ball. In another example, people who 

skill. While quality instruction is important to have had strokes that limit or eliminate their short- 

speeding up learning, one cannot become skilled term memory may not remember having practiced 

without experience and practice. Scholars who a skill previously but may still show improvement 

study the wide variation in skill and expertise from practice to practice (Meehan et al., 2011). 
The refinements in the nervous system that 

between individuals explore whether or not it 
result from practice are referred to as learning. 

is largely due to an accumulation of deliberate 
Although much has yet to be discovered about 

practice. Deliberate practice has been defined 
learning, scientists agree that it is primarily a cen- 

as engaging in activities created specifically to 
tral phenomenon rather than a peripheral one. 

improve performance in a domain (Ericsson et al., 
This is another way of saying that learning results 

1993). The famous study by Ericsson et al. noted 
from rebuilding neural pathways in the brain 

that some of the best violinists may accumulate 
and spinal cord rather than making changes in 

10,000 hours of practice compared to under 8,000 
peripheral organs such as bone and muscle. (Even 

hours for “good” violinists and under 5,000 hours 
though we often hear the term muscle memory, 

for the least accomplished. Popular press reports 
the remembering is done not by the muscles but 

and books citing this work have, unfortunately, 
by the brain.) We also know that these changes 

stuck the idea in the public mind that expert or 
tend to be relatively permanent. If, after having 

elite performance in any motor skill requires 10,000 
played many years of tennis, you do not return to 

hours of deliberate practice. Sometimes standards 
the court for several years, the level of your play 

like 10,000 hours or 10,000 steps a day are helpful 
will deteriorate, but with a little practice you will 

and sometimes they are not. 
Let’s preview a little motor learning research 

quickly regain it. Amazing, isn’t it? 
When you learn a motor skill, you remap the 

from the subdiscipline of motor behavior (chap- 

ter 6). The highest-quality scientific evidence 
neural routes in your central nervous system. As 



a 40 Introduction to Kinesiology 

you know from your own experience, this remap- LoKEY POINT lset e 
ping doesn’t happen overnight. Depending on the The type of physical activity experience that brings 
skill involved, it may take weeks, years, or even about changes in skill is called practice. The relatively 
decades to master. Of course, the extent to which 

permanent effect of practice on performance is called 
changes in skill become permanent depends a 

learning. 
great deal on how much you practice the skill and 
having adequate physical capacity to perform the 
movement. 

Research and Evidence-Based Practice in Kinesiology 
Nature vs. Nurture 

Earlier we noted that psychologists interested in motor expertise found that deliberate practice 
accounted for up to 26 percent of the variance in performance (Macnamara et al., 2014), with 
18 percent for sports. If about 20 percent of sports performance is related to practice, about 
80 percent of performance is related to other factors. Subsequently, Macnamara, Moreau, and 
Hambrick (2016) took advantage of additional kinesiology research on sports to extend their 
meta-analysis on practice and sports performance. They again found 18 percent of the variance 
of sports performance was related to practice, but the additional factors (age, type of sport, skill 
level) in the studies on sports performance could be included in the analysis. For example, prac- 
tice was more important for lower-skilled persons (19 percent) and much less important for elite 
athletes (1 percent). Interestingly, their analysis on starting age was not statistically significant, 
so the consensus of this line of research so far is that athletes reaching high skill levels did not 
begin earlier in childhood than athletes reaching lower skill levels. See chapter 6 for more evidence 
on early specialization in youth sports. 

Training, Conditioning, and Physical designed to increase his physical capacity through 

Performance Capacity the development of agility, muscular endurance, 
cardiorespiratory endurance, and flexibility—all of 

The second type of change brought about by expe- which he believes to be almost as important as skill 
rience is much different from learning. Improve- in tennis. As a result, he becomes a more proficient 
ments in some physical activities hinge less on tennis player in competition than Samuel. Although 
improving the accuracy or timing of your move- both players have learned the skills of tennis to 
ments and more on improving strength, developing the same degree, Jose ends up as the better player 
the capacity to exert greater force, endurance, or because he has supplemented his skill development 
increasing the range of motion at joints. These with improvement of other performance qualities 
factors are not elements of skill so much as they that are important in the sport. 
are elements of physical performance capacity. 
To put it simply, strength, endurance, and flexibility 
are less learned than they are developed. _eKEY POINT ee 

Consider the case of two tennis players, Samuel Physical activity experiences known as training are 
and Jose, both of whom have devoted long hours 

used to develop such performance qualities as muscle 
of practice to the sport and played in competitive 

strength and endurance, cardiorespiratory endurance, 
leagues. They have developed about the same level 
of skill in tennis, as is evidenced by their equal and flexibility. The state of having developed these 

proficiency in serving, hitting backhand and fore- qualities is known as conditioning. 

hand strokes, and playing at the net. Then Jose, a 
perceptive kinesiology major, begins to supplement The supplemental types of experiences that Jose 
his tennis practice with a rigorous training program engaged in included weightlifting, cardio drills, 



Chapter 2| Importance of the Physical Activity Experience 

stretching, and running—all of which are kinds of instead, there are many components. Among other 
physical activity experiences known as training. The things, this discovery produced the principle of speci- 
changes brought about by training are referred to as ficity, which will be an important topic in your major. 
conditioning. Training consists of physical activity In general, a physically fit person is one who 
experiences designed to improve muscular strength has used physical activity to develop the capacity 
and endurance, cardiorespiratory endurance, flexi- to perform the essential activities of daily living 
bility, and other aspects of performance that condi- at a high level, has enough energy remaining to 
tion the performer. Training increases the capacity pursue an active leisure life, and can still meet 
to move one’s body more forcefully (.e., strength) unexpected physical demands imposed by emer- 
over longer durations (endurance) and with more gencies. Because this type of fitness is reflected 
range of motion (flexibility). Generally, kinesiology in a capacity to perform physical activities, it is 
majors study the experiences of training that lead to called motor performance fitness, which has 
conditioning in courses on the physiology of phys- been defined succinctly as “the ability to perform 
ical activity, whereas they study the experiences of daily activities with vigor” (Pate, 1988, p. 177). Your 
practice that lead to learning in courses on motor motor performance fitness is reflected, for exam- 
behavior (motor control and motor learning). ple, in how many sit-ups or push-ups you can do 

and how long it takes you to run or walk a given 

Experience in Physical Activity distance. We know that this type of performance 
depends on unique components of fitness, such as 

and Physical Fitness 
strength, endurance, and flexibility. Because the 

Practice and training experiences play an import- performance of daily activities also requires other 
ant role not only in developing sport proficiency fitness components—such as balance, agility, coor- 
and rehabilitating injured body parts but also in dination, and quickness of response—some kine- 
increasing a person’s physical fitness—that is, his siologists include these components as additional 
or her overall capacity to safely perform activities of indicators of motor performance fitness. 
daily living. A person’s physical fitness depends on A second type of physical fitness, generally 
a complex blend of genetics and physical activity, regarded by those in the health-related professions 
and it involves a variety of components of interest as more significant than motor performance fitness, 
to kinesiology professionals. One of the key early is health-related fitness. This type of physical fit- 
discoveries in kinesiology revealed that there is not ness involves using physical activity experience to 
just one domain of athletic ability or physical fitness; develop the traits and capacities normally associ- 

Does Music Improve Exercise Performance? 

Most people who listen to music while exercising do so because they like music or it takes their 
minds off the discomfort that can accompany a hard workout. However, does listening to music 
improve performance? 

Atkinson (2004) examined whether background music improved starting, finishing, or overall 
power during a 10-kilometer cycling time trial. The study also evaluated whether music affected 
heart rate and subjective response (i.e., perceived effort). In the study, 16 subjects performed two 
10-kilometer time trials on a Cybex cycle ergometer—one with and one without “trance” dance 
music (a combination of forms of electronic music) being played in the background. The cyclists 
also completed a music rating inventory after the time trial in the music condition. When music 
was played, cyclists completed the time trial in an average of 1,030 seconds; when music was 

not played, the average time was 1,052 seconds—a difference that is significant both statistically 

and practically. Music brought about the largest increases in both time trial performance and heart 

rate during the first 3 kilometers of the trial. 
Participants rated the tempo and rhythm aspects of the music as more motivating than the 

harmony and melody aspects. Although the cyclists performed faster in the music condition, their 

perceptions of the effort required to cycle were also higher under the music. This finding suggests 

that listening to music did not make the exercise seem easier. 



Bl 42 Introduction to Kinesiology 

ated with a healthy body, specifically in relation to Heredity and Experience 
diseases that are known to result from a physically 
inactive lifestyle. These conditions, sometimes called Although physical experience is important in deter- 

hypokinetic diseases, include heart disease, high mining how well we can perform skills, it is not 

cholesterol, high blood pressure, diabetes, and obe- the only factor. Think about the incredible perfor- 

sity. Health-related fitness can be assessed directly by mance of Simone Biles at the 2016 Rio Olympics. 

using various technologies without actually assess- Can we say that the only thing that separates her 

ing motor performance. One example is the use of from most other gymnasts is her extensive experi- 

skinfold calipers to measure percentage of body fat. ence? Probably not. For one thing, she has a small, 

In other cases, health-related fitness can be assessed strong body that lends itself to generating dynamic 

while the subject engages in motor performance. For movement and rotating in the air. In addition, her 

instance, recording heart activity (via electrocardi- strong lower body helps her maintain balance, and 

ography), blood pressure, and heart and respiration her genetically endowed nervous system may give 

rates while a person exercises can give kinesiologists her unusual control over her movements. At the 

a fairly clear picture of his or her health in terms of same time, she has had, since her earliest years, an 

cardiovascular-related hypokinetic disease. unflagging commitment to becoming a world-class 

Figure 2.6 illustrates the various components gymnast. This raises the question of how much 

assessed by motor- and health-related fitness tests. As heredity contributes to athletic performance. As 

you can see, some of the motor fitness measures bear we have seen, athletes cannot move to elite status 

little relation to the health of the individual. Could unless they have spent years gaining experience in 

someone with a diseased cardiovascular system score an activity. Kinesiology usually uses the term elite to 

high on a balance, strength, or agility test? Such a refer to highest levels (professional, international, 

result is quite likely. On the other hand, some com- or Olympic) of athletic performance, requiring both 

ponents of fitness are often assessed by both motor- outstanding genetics and practice. 

and health-related tests. Flexibility influences motor Heredity certainly interacts with other factors in 

performance capacity and health-related range of determining skill and performance potential. For 

motion of joints, although the health-related theory is example, you and a friend may have had about the 

being challenged by recent evidence (Nuzzo, 2020). same amount of competitive basketball practice, 
and both of you may have adhered to rigorous con- 
ditioning programs to improve your jumping ability 

£E113 620) || eeee  and overall strength. Yet you may be a much better 

The term fitness activities refers to training experiences player than your friend. Why? Perhaps you were 

that improve our general capacity to perform daily activi- more dedicated and more highly motivated to suc- 
ceed. Perhaps you were also lucky enough to have 

ties and help prevent disease processes associated with 
parents whose stature and abilities were passed on 

low levels of physical activity. Fitness activities require 
to you. You may be taller, faster, or more agile, or 

skill, but the emphasis is on conditioning. 
you may have what seems to be a natural facility 
for changing direction, jumping, or coordinating 
the movements of your arms and legs—all of which 

Motor Health-related are important to success in basketball. Practice and 
performance tests fitness tests training can modify most of these characteristics to 

some degree, but the genetic contribution of your 

ml Sei... parents plays a significant role in your abilities and 
free iad ce in the trainability of those abilities. 

Flexibili y 
Cardi Be aa 
< eengyu ran Subjective Experience 

of Physical Activity 
Given the variety of external factors that influence 

GEWWTSEX} «Components of physical fitness fall into physical activity, as well as the obvious physical 
two categories: motor performance and health-related aspects of experiencing an activity, one can easily 
fitness. Some components meet requirements for both forget about the importance of our inner or sub- 
categories. jective experience of physical activity. Nonetheless, 
Adapted from Pate (1988). 



Chapter 2| Importance of the Physical Activity Experience 

unobservable emotions are at least as important as SKEY:POIN Seen es ie ee tae 
the physical, hands-on experience of our favorite 
physical activities. The realm of subjective experience involves the inte- 

If we are to become enthusiastic 
about a particular form of physica rior and sometimes mysterious aspect of our lives, in 

l activity—be 
it basketball, aerobics, hiking, weight training, which we collect, recall, and reflect on the feelings and 

taekwondo, or anything else—then something in meanings that physical activity evokes for us. 
the activity must contact our innermost selves in a 
way that causes us to repeatedly return to it. This 
relationship between physical activity and our inner 
lives matters greatly to kinesiology professionals. Physical Activity Experiences 
Indeed, how could we promote physical activity, for as Subjective and Unique 
ourselves or others, if we could not find the moti- 

Whether physical activity is associated with work, 
vation or internal joy associated with such activity? 

education, or some other sphere of experience, the 
To consider an example, the experience of run- 

feelings we have when we move our bodies differ 
ning is not limited to putting one foot ahead of 

from the feelings we have when we are sitting 
the other in a mindless repetition of movements, 

or lying motionless. Moreover, physical activities 
nor is it simply a matter of having your muscles 

themselves do not all stimulate the same subjective 
contract and your heart pound in a mechanical 

experiences. For example, executing a series of 
fashion. The experience also involves feeling your 

push-ups conjures a distinctly different subjective 
racing pulse and the warmth of your body, the 

experience than does hitting a golf ball. Similarly, 
sense of energy being released in your muscles, and the feelings associated with playing racquetball 
the sensations of fatigue. In addition, it includes differ from those associated with running on a 
the memories that the experience impresses on treadmill, and both of these feeling sets differ from 
you, as well as changes in how you think and feel the feelings associated with typing on a keyboard, 
about the act of running and about yourself. In even though all three endeavors require physical 
this way, the physical features of activity merely activity. 
set the stage for our subjective experiences. The 
late George Sheehan, a runner and a cardiologist 
who wrote extensively about the spiritual side of meEY PON eee ee 
running, described it this way: “The first half hour 

One of the main reasons we seek out physical activity 
of my run is for my body. The last half hour is for 

is that it supplies us with unique forms of human expe- 
my soul. In the beginning the road is a miracle of 
solitude and escape. In the end it is a miracle of rience unavailable to us in other areas of everyday life. 

discovery and joy” (1978, p. 225). 

Professional Issues in Kinesiology 

Subjective Perception of Overload 
The kinesiology principle of overload holds that the intensity of physical training needs to be higher 
than the performer’s current level of fitness in order to produce training effects. Developing an 
understanding of how much intensity is too little, how much is desirable, and how much is too 

much constitutes much of the learning that occurs through physical activity experience. Thus, first- 

hand experience is useful to kinesiology professionals and their clients, as is research about the 

perception of physical activity intensity, which often uses heart rate or rating of perceived exertion 

(RPE). This is particularly true for water activities where the person’s perception of intensity or 

overload does not match the actual biomechanical and physiological load on the body (Alberton 

et al., 2016). 

Citation style: APA . 

Alberton, C.L., Pinto, C.C., Gorski, T., Antunes, A.H., Finatto, P, Cadore, E.L.,... Kruel, L.AM. (2016). Rating 

of perceived exertion in maximal incremental tests during head-out water-based aerobic exercises. Journal 

of Sports Sciences, 34(18), 1691-1698. doi:10.1080/02640414.2015.113480 



mm 44 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Subjective Experiences in Physical Engaging in physical activity can touch us emo- 

tionally, mentally, and spiritually. When we allow 
Activity Often Overlooked this to happen, our physical activity experiences 
Sometimes we engage in physical activity with- are more meaningful. 
out pausing to ask ourselves what thoughts and 
feelings it generates or how it fits into the larger 
scheme of life. For instance, even if our subjective Wrap-Up 
experiences constitute the underlying reason for There is something special about the experience 
which we engage in an activity, we may lose sight of physical activity. Although kinesiology often 
of this important fact if we become too involved focuses on exercise and sport, kinesiologists study 
in competition or in achieving our goals. broad and diverse spheres of physical activity. By 

now you realize that physical activity is important 
Physical Activity ls Best When to the human experience of everyday life, self-ex- 

Personally Meaningful pression, health, recreation, and longevity. Kine- 
siology professionals prescribe physical activity 

Unless we are attracted to the subjective aspects experiences in all these spheres to contribute to 
of a given physical activity—that is, unless we dis- a full and rich life. Physical activity itself provides 
cover something inherently enjoyable in it—then an important source of experiential knowledge 
the activity is unlikely to become personally mean- that should be integrated with physical activity 
ingful to us. In other words, the physical, tangible scholarship. 
side of physical activity provides the raw material You cannot fully appreciate all of the variables 
for the experience, but a positive subjective expe- that come into play in prescribing physical activity 
rience keeps us coming back for more. As noted in experiences for your clients until you have com- 
the chapter opener, some people surf primarily for pleted your study of kinesiology. However, this 
subjective enjoyment and for an almost spiritual joy chapter introduced you to a number of general fac- 
in the activity. In sport, and in many other kinds of tors that you must take into account. These factors 
physical activity, unless you can invest the activity 

include considering whether the activity consists 
with the deepest resources of your mind and will, 

of skills that must be learned through practice 
participation can be hollow and lack meaning. 

or physical capacities that must be conditioned 
Kinesiology professionals must remember how 

through training. In addition, in order to improve 
people vary in their subjective perceptions of spe- 

performance, any practice or training regimen must 
cific physical activities, and they should try to help 

focus on the critical elements of the activity and 
clients find activities that are meaningful to them. 

provide in-depth, meaningful experiences. Finally, 
If you have ever ice-skated in solitude on a 

experience interacts with inherited traits to bring 
frozen pond or cycled along a country road on a 

about performance changes. 
brisk fall morning, then you have probably enjoyed 

When we move our bodies, unique and subjec- 
the subjective pleasures offered by physical activity. 

tive sensations elicited by internal and external 
The same pleasures may come to you when you’re 

sources give rise to emotions, thoughts, and other 
struggling through a difficult wrestling practice in a 

inner states. These sensations and our interpreta- 
hot, humid room or when your lungs are bursting 

tions of their meanings constitute the subjective 
in the final stages of a tough aerobics workout. 

7 Listening to Your Body 

As noted, we sometimes don’t pay attention to the subjective experiences of physical activity. 
Here, however, is a much different point of view from philosopher Heather Reid: “In contrast to 
such sedentary activities as taking tests or watching TV in which we try to ignore our bodies, sport 
forces us to listen to our bodies. . . . [Athletes] savor the exhaustion that follows a well-played 
game or a race well run, even as they welcome the pain-numbing endorphins that miraculously 
quiet their bodies’ screams midway through a hard effort. . . . What most athletes don’t know, but 
philosophical athletes do know, is just how much can be learned from listening to their bodies. 
Listen closely enough to your body and you might discover a window to your soul” (2002, Deo) 



Chapter 2 |I mportance of the Physical Activity Experience 45 

The joy of movement is one source of meaning for many physical activities. 

Dragan Trifunovic/fotolia.com 

experience of physical activity, which helps deter- nature of physical activity. Kinesiology profession- 
mine our activity preferences and constitutes our als would be wise to keep in mind the perspective, 
primary reason for engaging in activity in the first subjective experience, and perceptions of their 
place. It also helps us learn about ourselves and the clients’ physical activity experiences. 

Organizations in Addition to Kinesiology Organizations from Chapter 1 

American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) 

American Public Health Association (APHA) 

Association for Experiential Education 

Association for the Study of Play (TASP) 

College and University Instructional PA Programs: Special-interest group of SHAPE America 

Human Factors and Ergonomics Society (HFES) 

National Recreation and Park Association (NRPA) 

Journals (Selected Examples by Sphere of Physical Activity) 

Self-Sufficiency— 

Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 

Journal of Occupational Therapy 

Physical Therapy 



Wg 46 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Self-Expression 

Journal of Dance Medicine & Science 

Medical Problems of Performing Artists 

Work 

Ergonomics 

Human Factors 

Human Performance 

Education 

European Physical Education Review 

Journal of Teaching in Physical Education 

Physical Educator 

Leisure 

Journal of Adventure Education and Outdoor Learning 

Journal of Outdoor Recreation, Education, and Leadership 

Health 

Journal for the Measurement of Physical Activity Behavior 

Journal of Physical Activity & Health 

Competition 

International Journal of Sports Science & Coaching 

International Sport Coaching Journal 

Journal for the Study of Sports and Athletes in Education 

=REVIEW QUESTIONS e
1. Why are ADLs and IADLs important to kinesiologists who work with people who are elderly 

or who have disabilities? 

2. What are the diverse spheres of physical activity, and what kinesiology or other profes- 
sionals work in these spheres? 

3. How does physical activity experience contribute to our knowledge and our potential 
expertise, skill, and ability to perform the activity? 

. List three health benefits of regular physical activity. 

. What does the element of competition add to physical activity? 

. Is all physical activity good or safe? 

DofNFO .  What factors influence our decisions about what physical activities to engage in and how 
physically active to be? 

8. What physical activities benefit most from practice? From training? 

9. Discuss the importance of the subjective experience of a person’s daily run through a large park. 

is | KP rope |») Go to HKPropel to complete the activities for this chapter. 



Scholarly Study 
of Physical Activity 

z/iStock/Getty Images 

Although it is essential for kinesiologists to learn through their own physical 
activity experiences, that alone is not enough. Professionals in the field are also 
defined by their mastery of kinesiology, the complex body of theoretical knowledge | 
about physical activity. Some people who have not formally studied kinesiology may. 
think they know a good deal about physical activity, but their information - is often 
incomplete, out of date, or simply untrue. As a kinesiology major, you—more than 
the typical person on the street or your friends in other majors—need to have a solid 

é : base of knowledge about physical COUN SE eae 
. 



mg 48 Part Il 

Physical activity 
experience 

Professional 
experiencei n 

physical activity _ 

“Scholarship 
= Obes 3 

_ physical activity 

To that end, part II of this book introduces you to the scholarly study of physical activity through 
seven subdisciplines of kinesiology. Although the field also includes other subdisciplines, as well 
as various applied areas of research in professional applications, these seven subdisciplines 
have gained recognition as major categories of kinesiology knowledge. Chapter 3 focuses on the 
philosophy of physical activity, asking and answering the big questions about values, meaning, and 
ethics in sport and exercise. Chapter 4 is devoted to the history of sport and exercise; it provides 
you with a glimpse of how the field of kinesiology has evolved. In chapter 5, you will examine 
relationships between sport and exercise, as well as some of the pressing social issues of our 
day, such as racial and gender discrimination. Chapter 6 directs your attention to the learning 
and performance of skilled movement and factors affecting it, including those related to human 
development. 

In chapter 7, you will study the psychological aspects of physical activity and learn how this 
important dimension of our lives both affects and is affected by sport and exercise. Chapter 8 
introduces you to the fascinating world of biomechanics, which provides insights into the ways 
in which forces create the variety of movements that constitute physical activity. Finally, chapter 
9 addresses basic physiological aspects of physical activity, including the effects of exercise on 
muscular and cardiovascular systems and the physiological basis for training. 

Even though these chapters are jam-packed with information, they provide a “once over lightly” 
preview of these scholarly subdisciplines. Thus, when you finish reading and studying them, you 
will not have mastered the content or the holistic body of knowledge that constitutes kinesiology. 
However, you will have taken a glimpse at what lies ahead of you in your program of studies, in 
which you will delve into each of these subdisciplines in greater depth and discover how they must 
be integrated to help clients with their physical activity passions and problems. 



Philosophy of Physical Activity 
Cesar R. Torres and Scott Kretchmar 

In this chapter, we will 

examine the nature of philosophical thinking, 

describe how philosophy fits into the field of kinesiology, 

describe research methods used int he philosophy :o f physical activity, 

review the history and future of the philosophy of physical activity, and 

provide an overview of knowledge in this domain byf ocusing on four 
issues: the nature of the person; the nature of sport, competition, and 

play; the value of physical activity; and the ethics of sport. 



Ever since your college graduation with a degree in sport management, you have worked 
diligently to build a career in professional basketball and make a name for yourself. You remember 

fondly that 20 years ago, you were hired by a team in the top basketball league in the nation as 

an assistant equipment manager. Now you serve as the executive vice president of basketball 

operations for another team in that league. You have come a long way. 2 

The team you now work for has a storied past. However, in the last few seasons it has struggled 

to remain competitive and is currently considered to be an average and uninspired team. The team’s 

chairperson, president of basketball operations, general manager, and head coach believe that the 

kind of intentional losing often called “tanking” could be a key strategy for rebuilding the team. 

They summon you to a planning meeting. You know that tanking requires avoiding winning in the 
short term in order to accomplish the team’s longer-term objectives. You are aware that it has been 
a recognized tactic since the 1980s, that some teams have been sanctioned for implementing it, 
and that its effectivenessi s questionable. You also have qualms about the impact that tanking 
could have on the integrity of basketball and your team. Yet many teams, not only in basketball but 
also in other sports, continue to use it. Besides, your team is pressed for schemes to improve its 
competitiveness, and the rules of basketbal! do not explicitly preclude tanking. As a responsible 
and conscientious member of the executive staff, you want to do what is right for your team and 
for basketball. However, you are torn by this situation. Should you go along with the proposal to 
use tanking as a strategy, simply raise your concerns, or openly oppose it? 

__ If sport and coaching are not your thing, here is another ethical dilemma. You are the administra- 
tor of a health and recreation program for a midsize city. One of your responsibilities is to promote 
physical activity. You are well aware that this responsibility can be met by supporting traditional ; 
activities such as tennis, swimming, hiking, gardening, yoga, Pilates, weight training, and golf. There- 
“ fore, you make sure that your town maintains the requisite facilities for these activities—including, 
: among others, swimming pools, jogging trails, and golf courses. You also conscientiously advertise 
_ these kinds of sport. and exercise ‘programs for all ages. However, you have noticed a decline in 

e participation. and have become aware that many people in your community, particularly children 
: and young adults, are attracted to al ernative Sports and adventure activities, such as X Games 
sports, white -water rafting, wwi nd surfing, hang gliding, obstacle course races, and ultra endurance 

oe events. You. would like to bring your own program up to date and provide a more attractive array 
a of Bee At thes amei e ae know that fc of ee alternate exercise and sport oe 

— tot he guns: attractivenes So 
Pe All of your training as a kinesiology ae oe you that safety must always be 

5 the top priority. Moreover, you know that most school and recreation programs have eliminated 
: . activities. that present a high risk of catastrophic injury, such as boxing and trampoline jumping. 
Some schools. are even deba ting ae future oft heir footbalel e 
- given recent research 
findings about head 
injuries. Thus, you feel — 
caught: How much risk 
is tolerable? At what 
_ age should individuals 
be able to decide for | 
themselves what sport- _ 
ing risks they take? You. 
wonder if school and 
recreation programs 
have erred on the side 
of safety and liability 
avoidance. What should 
you do? 



Chapter 3| Philosophy of Physical Activity 

In addressing challenging issues, philosophy can When faced with such questions, philosophy 
be useful because it aims to provide a clear and may not be able to provide “proofs” or “slam-dunk” 
objective perspective from which to untangle arguments on one side or another. However, this 
complex considerations. Philosophical methods does not mean that philosophy cannot produce 
would have us see things both as they are and as persuasive evidence. Moreover, even partial or 
they should be. In the case of tanking as strategy, tentative answers are often more valuable than no 
philosophy would have us take a step back and answers at all. 
try to answer the following kinds of questions: Do 
the empirical claims about tanking have a factual 
basis? If so, what is the magnitude of its impact? Is it Why Use Philosophical Thinking? 
tolerable? What constitutes an acceptable strategy? The short answer to this question is that philosoph- 
Could tanking tarnish the image of basketball? Why ical thinking is distinctive and valuable. Philosophy, 
should sportspeople care about the integrity of the in fact, has been called the queen of the sciences, 
game? Is avoiding winning against the nature of an honorific title that points to its special qualities. 
competition? Are longer-term goals more important In this introductory section, we discuss the nature 
than short-term goals? What are the main duties of and value of philosophy, as well as its role in what 
a professional sport team’s executive staff? we describe as a cross-disciplinary field. 

Our second scenario—the one about high-risk 
activities—pits two goods against one another. 

Nature and Value of Philosophy 
The first involves health, safety, and longevity; the 
second involves meaning, significance, and hap- Philosophical thinking involves reflecting more 
piness. These two goods acknowledge two truths than it requires testing, measuring, or examining 
about our existence: Life itself is precious, and things with our senses. In contrast, physiologists 
we are built to pursue meaning or significance. A test physiological responses, for example, by put- 
short life is typically regarded as unfortunate if not ting people on treadmills to find out how they react 
tragic, and many would also argue that a life with to various conditions. Biomechanists measure the 
no purpose or joy is not worth living. forces generated by various movement techniques 

Some people find meaning and significance in and kinds of equipment. Psychologists examine 
extreme challenges and high-risk activities even subjective reports from people who have been 
when at play. Here, enculturation and emotion can interviewed, and historians analyze various docu- 
cloud our vision. In a society that deifies health and ments for information about our past. 
safety—and one that is highly litigious and values Philosophers also learn a great deal by living in 
work over play—high-risk leisure activities may the world and experiencing it. Thus, in some ways 

seem irrational and even immoral. This cluster of they also test, measure, and examine. They use this 
factors can result in an existence that is safe but information from daily living for later reflections. In 
insipid. Thus, philosophers would also want to other words, the tools they use relate to different 
ask about the individual right to choose one’s own ways of mulling things over, using logic, speculat- 

life course—both at work and at play. Doesn’t the ing, imagining—or simply thinking! You will have 
freedom to choose carry some weight? In addition a chance to learn about and practice three of these 
to life itself, doesn’t the quality of life matter? Do ways of reflecting in a later section of this chapter. 

we own our own bodies, and should we have a Here, we need to appreciate two important clar- 

say in body-related decisions? 

Goals of Philosophy of Physical Activity 

> To understand the nature of health and physical activity, particularly in the forms of exercise, 
sport, games, play, and dance 

>» To understand how confident we can be about our claims in kinesiology 

>» To understand the most important values of physical activity, as well as its contribution to 

good living 

> To learn how we ought to behave in sport and in our professional lives as kinesiologists 



Mg 52 Introduction to Kinesiology 

ifications. First, philosophical methods typically do >» Probable assertion: This is the kind of 

not include gathering data from controlled experi- claim around which a considerable amount of evi- 

ments; instead, they use various types of reflection. dence can be gathered. This evidence may speak 

Second, contrary to what some believe (and perhaps to personal experience, logic, immediate insight 

to doubts of your own), philosophy can produce or intuition, or objective observations of the world 
results that are as valid and reliable as anything and human behavior. When we hear evidence for a 

discovered by the natural sciences. Of course, this probable assertion, we are likely to conclude that 

description does not apply to all philosophy, but it is likely to be true or at least partly true. When 
that does not mean that everything in philosophy is we argue that all people are created equal, or that 

unreliable or consists of little more than guesswork, all human beings should enjoy certain rights, a 
wild speculation, or groundless personal opinion. considerable amount of persuasive evidence can be 

Let’s take a look at four types of philosophical brought to bear on these principles. These claims, 
claims. They range from personal opinion, charac- for instance, were viewed as self-evident truths by 
terized by limited supporting evidence, to claims the framers of the U.S. Constitution. While iden- 
that seem patently true because they come with tifying these claims as self-evident is probably an 
considerable supporting evidence. overstatement, such tenets of democracy still have 

>» Personal opinion: This type of claim indi- a high degree of appeal and probable truth value. 

cates individual taste or preference. This is the >» Truth assertion: Some have argued that 
lowest level of truth claim because it is difficult philosophy can never provide sufficient evidence for 
to rally persuasive arguments to support such truth claims, but the same has been said about much 
judgments. Behind these judgments lie individual research in science. For our purposes here, we regard 
differences, diverse life experiences, and contra- truth assertions as those claims that are very difficult 
dictory but equally valid attitudes. Thus, we might to question. When we claim that it is wrong—with 
say that personal opinions are true for a given rare, if any, exceptions—to torture people, we think 
person, or a group of people, but not necessarily we are making an ethical claim that is objectively 
for all others. For instance, my claim that vanilla and universally accurate. When we argue that love 
is the best flavor of ice cream is a reasonable one, is not the same thing as hatred, it would be hard to 
but your own preference for, say, coffee-flavored dispute this powerful distinction known to all of us. 
ice cream is reasonable too. Thus, we agree to We would never confuse one for the other. Moreover, 
disagree without any hope of solving the matter. how would anyone ever rally a persuasive argument 
You are entitled, as the common expression goes, to the effect that love and hatred are exactly the same 
to your own opinion, as long as it is a reasonable thing? Because they cannot do so, we can conclude 
one. Notice, however, that even opinions have a with a very high degree of confidence that love and 
truth criterion. They have to be reasonable. If you hatred are markedly different. 
claimed that mud-flavored ice cream is best, it 
would still be an opinion, but it would not pass the 
test of reasonableness or common sense. KOEY POINT ES 

>» Speculation: Although speculations are not Philosophers reflect more than they measure, and their 
merely opinions, they are still very hard to support reflections range from informed personal opinions 
with evidence. When someone tells us why he or and speculative assertions to claims that are likely 
she believes that a speculation is true, we may to be true. 
believe that the claim is plausible, but typically, 
we also retain doubts. For example, philosophical 
claims that God exists or that love is the preemi- Behind all of this activity lies what many have 
nent value could be true, but we may never know called a love of wisdom; in fact, the word philos- 
for sure. Also, it is unlikely that evidence will ever ophy means precisely that. The pursuit of wisdom 
come along to support or refute such claims con- requires that we ask different questions and use 
clusively. Notice, however, that speculations, similar different tools of research than those in other parts 
to opinions, have truth criteria. Speculations can be of our colleges and universities. Philosophical 
plausible or outlandish. If someone were to claim, questions probe the very core of our discipline and 
for no observable reason, that the world will come professions: Why should you be a kinesiologist? 
to an end next Thursday at noon, we would likely What kind of good do kinesiologists bring into the 
regard that speculative claim as outlandish and world? Is a profession that focuses on health and 
that person as a crank, not a seer or wise prophet. physical activity as important as a profession that 



Chapter 3] Philosophy of Physical Activity 53 

focuses on more traditional academic subjects such their own empirical studies most effectively? If this 
as writing, reading, or mathematics? Is it ethically is true, then we can argue that philosophers and 
acceptable to spend more time on a needy client scientists have a moral obligation to work together 
and neglect one who seems to be in better health? from the outset of their studies and research. They 
Are triage decisions to save the life of a younger have this obligation because the validity and utility 
person over an older one ethically defensible? of both scientific and philosophical discoveries 

Answers to such questions cannot be found depend on such up-front collaboration. 
merely by using skin calipers, microscopes, petri If our research areas are interdependent, then 
dishes, or even surveys. Instead, such questions we need a holistic representation of the spheres of 
require that we reflect, examine with the mind’s physical activity—one that differs from the tradi- 
eye, use logic, and discern value. In short, philos- tional representation we use in other parts of the 
ophy asks the big, meaning-of-life questions and book (see the part Il opener figure). In this view, 
uses research tools that transcend those of other although we can identify different areas of study, 
disciplines. which are listed in the big circle of figure 3.1, no 

area is entirely distinct. Thus, no lines divide the 
areas; they are not separate puzzle pieces. Rather, 

SDE C RUIN ee ee they fade off and run into one another—from 
Philosophy of physical activity involves reflecting on philosophy to history to sociology and so on. The 

the nature and value of both tangible and intangible satellites attached to the big circle depict the ways 

objects, actual experience, and hypothetical possi- in which scholarship and application are related. 

bilities. The sphere nearest the big circle represents the 
sum benefit of our cross-disciplinary field of study. 
A reciprocal relationship then exists between the 
two other parts. One leads to participation in phys- 

Philosophers and Scientists ical activity—in work, exercise, games, play, and 

Working Together sport—whereas the other leads to the workplace 
and the practical problems faced there. Interaction 

The methods and products of philosophy are typi- 
between the spheres is two-way, thus suggesting 

cally thought to complement those of the natural and 
that theory informs practice and, conversely, prac- 

social sciences; similarly, we are used to thinking of 
tice informs theory. 

kinesiology not as cross-disciplinary but as multidis- 
In the big circle, no single discipline rules the 

ciplinary. This conception implies that kinesiology’s 
roost. We are mutually dependent on one another, 

component subdisciplines and spheres—such as 
and we are the mutual beneficiaries of one anoth- 

physiology, biomechanics, and philosophy—are 
er’s work. Likewise, for the satellites to the right, 

relatively independent. On this view, investigators 
no circle dominates the others. Physical activity 

in each area conduct their research on their own 
experience, scholarship, and professional experi- 

and then join hands after the fact in order to solve 
ence depend on one another and benefit from each 

larger problems. This process is much like putting other’s perspectives. This conception produces the 
together the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle. Philosophy 

holistic, democratic, and egalitarian notion of the 
produces its own puzzle piece, then takes it to a discipline of kinesiology as described in chapter 1. 
meeting where all of the diverse pieces are put 
together. Thus, philosophers and scientists can work 
together, and one way to do so is to contribute valu- What Do Philosophers Do? 
able puzzle pieces for the purpose of producing a 

Philosophers pursue the same goal as other mem- 
more complete picture of things. 

bers of the cross-disciplinary kinesiology team. In 
But what if philosophy and other disciplines 

the broadest terms, this goal is simply to better 
were to realize that they are actually interdepen- 

understand the world and our lives in it. For our field 
dent? What if philosophy cannot stand on its own 

in particular, the objective is to better understand 
but rather needs insights from cell biology, anthro- 

human movement or, as it is identified in this text, 
pology, and other areas of study in order to ask the 

physical activity. Philosophical thinking is needed 
right questions and proceed with useful reflections? 

in order to address a number of issues that are 
What if this is also true of such fields as physiology, 

important for kinesiologists. Here are four kinds of 
biomechanics, and sport psychology? What if they 

issues that fall into philosophical subdomains called 
need the insights of literature, history, and philoso- 

metaphysics, epistemology, axiology, and ethics. 
phy in order to ask their own questions and design 



mm 54 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Physical activity 
experience 

Professional 
experience in 

__ physical activity 

Philosophy of Scholarship 

physical activity of 
physical activity 

GEUSERE Holistic kinesiology encourages cross-disciplinary research, professional practice, and performance, 
as illustrated by the removal of hard lines, and the opening of doors, between the subdisciplines. 

>» What is the scope of our field? Is kinesiol- epistemology. This branch of philosophy examines 
ogy responsible for all forms of movement or only how we know things and with what assurance we 
skilled movement? Should we focus on physical can claim that something is true. Thus, it has to 
fitness, or is our domain that of overall health? For do with bias, perspective, objectivity, socialization 
people interested in cultural activities, which ones or enculturation, and other issues related to the 
should be included under the umbrella of kinesi- strength of the conclusions we reach. In episte- 
ology? Sport? Games? Play? Exercise for health? mology, we ask questions such as the following: 
Exercise for other purposes? Dance? To make such Am I aware of all (or even most) of the attitudes 
judgments, we must lay some groundwork in an and potentially skewed perspectives that I bring to 
area called metaphysics, which is the branch my reflections? Can I become entirely objective, or 
of philosophy that distinguishes one thing from at least objective enough to trust my conclusions? 
another. The work done here is largely descriptive. >» What really matters in kinesiology? Is it 
Before we can decide, for instance, whether the health? Pleasure? Knowledge? Skill? How does kine- 
scope of our field should include all movement or siology contribute to the good life? Can a person live 
only skilled movement, we need to describe what a meaningful life without spending time outdoors 
these two things are. Thus, in metaphysics we ask: or without having a variety of recreational skills? 
What is movement? What is skilled movement? Should everyone be able to swim? Is kinesiology 
What is exercise? What is health? largely an auxiliary profession in which we teach 

>» How confident can we be as kinesiolo- skills, fix broken bodies, and promote health? Or 
gists about the objectivity and validity of our is it a liberal profession in which we celebrate play 
attitudes and perceptions about health, sport, and other forms of freedom in movement? Should we 
obesity, and related matters? Are we confident promote life per se, or quality of life, or both equally? 
enough in our understandings to export our con- To make judgments about these questions, we must 
clusions to other cultures? Is obesity really an epi- lay some groundwork in an area called axiology, a 
demic, or does that depend on one’s perspective? branch of philosophy that examines the value of dif- 
Should obesity be conceptualized as inherently ferent experiences, conditions, objectives, or things. It 
dangerous, or does that too depend, for example, requires that we make judgments about the relative 
on how it is seen in different cultures? To make worth of things in the world (such as health) and 
judgments about such questions, we must again experiences (such as pain-free living). In axiology, 
lay some groundwork, this time in an area called we ask questions such as the following: What kind 



Chapter 3| Philosophy of Physical Activity 55 

Kinesiology Colleagues 

Angela Schneider 
One of the most pressing 
ethical issues in sport 
involves the prohibition 
of some forms of per- 
formance enhancement, 
or, more specifically, the 
elimination of doping. This 
issue is well known to 
Angela Schneider, profes- 
sor of kinesiology at West- 
ern University and former 
silver medalist in rowing 
at the 1984 Olympics, 
who co-chaired and then 
became the first woman 
director of the Ethics and 
Education Committee of 
the World Anti-Doping 
Agency (WADA). She and 
her committee—which M0 courtesy oPlonn EM ENGE Mccann tenet ante 
included other sport philosophers as 
well as sport scientists, coaches, and international-level athletic administrators—reviewed policy 
and enforcement techniques. Based on contributions from Schneider’s committee and others, as 
well as stakeholder groups, WADA directors wrote the World Anti-Doping Code. Schneider’s com- 
mittee then developed an educational strategy and helped WADA launch an advertising campaign 
to promote clean sport and fair competition. 

During this process, it was important to have philosophers at the table and to draw on the kind 
of leadership shown by Schneider. Among the questions debated were the following: What counts 
as doping? (This is both a metaphysical and a scientific question.) What is an unfair advantage? 
(This is a question of metaphysics and ethics.) What is good about drug-free competition? (This 
is a question of ethics and axiology.) What right should informed, adult athletes have in making 
decisions about performance enhancement? (This is a legal and ethical question.) How can we 
persuade athletes to become or remain drug free? (This is a question of policy and education.) 
What kind of evidence exists to support the values of clean competition? (This is an educational 
and epistemological question.) In short, Schneider's theoretical expertise in philosophy allowed 
her to rise to a position of considerable visibility and influence in international sport. 

of life should we pursue? What components go into inappropriate or even illegal? Do we have a moral 
high-quality living? How should we rank those values obligation to blow the whistle? What if blowing the 
that provide a means to other good things against whistle carries some risk to ourselves? What do we do 
values that constitute ends in themselves? then? Judgments about such questions fall within an 

> Finally, how should we behave as kinesi- area called ethics, which is the branch of philosophy 
that examines how we ought to behave. (It differs 

ologists? What exactly do we owe our employers, 
patients, clients, or students? When we sign a con- from historical, cultural, and so-called descriptive 

tract, what obligations do we have? What if we wake ethics, which describe attitudes and how people do 

up some morning and don’t feel like going to work? behave.) Ethics in this sense focuses on right and 
wrong, good actions and bad actions, what morally 

If we are not sick but are emotionally exhausted, 
responsible people do, and what irresponsible or 

would it be acceptable to take the day off? What 

if we see one of our colleagues doing something selfish people do—in short, how we should behave. 



lm 56 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Research Methods for Philosophy across the history of evolution in specific environ- 

ments to solve specific problems. It is possible, in 
of Physical Activity other words, that we have multiple I1Qs—one for 

spatial problems and others for motor problems, 
Now that you know about the goals of philosophy 

music problems, mathematical issues, language 
of physical activity and the kinds of questions phi- 

challenges, and so on—rather than a homogeneous 
losophers ask, let’s look at how scholars produce 

aptitude that allows us to call ourselves “smart.” 
knowledge in this subdiscipline. As you have seen, 

Philosophers need to know such things and use 
philosophers use various techniques of reflection 

them to constrain and direct their philosophical 
rather than measurement. Like all scholars, they ask 

reflections on the so-called theory of mind. 
questions. However, unlike many other research- 

The reverse is also true. That is, scientists neces- 
ers, philosophers try to answer those questions by 

sarily lean on philosophical methods and on intan- 
reflecting on experience, using logic, and trying out 

gibles such as meaning. They necessarily reflect on 
their conclusions in everyday life to see how well 

various matters throughout the inductive scientific 
they work. Thomas Nagel (1987) summarized the 
philosophical process by noting that philosophy “is process, even though some are unaware they are 

doing so. First, scientists employ values to determine 
done just by asking questions, arguing, trying out 

what is worth looking at and what is not. They 
ideas and thinking of possible arguments against 
them, and wondering how our concepts really settle on issues that are “important,” “significant,” “of 

work” (p. 4). potential value for humankind,” or “crucial for the 

Thus, in order to do philosophy, you don’t need advancement of science.” Second, they reflect during 

to be able to conduct scientific experiments or work the process of formulating their research problems, 

through mathematical proofs. You do, however, need coming up with potential hypotheses and develop- 

to be able to think carefully and precisely, and you ing research designs that are logically consistent 

can improve this skill with practice, just as people with them. Then, in deciding to test in one way or 

improve writing and athletic skills by working on another, they imagine different possibilities and use 

them. For some of us, reflection may be a relatively logic as well as empirical data. Ultimately, as the data 

new experience. This is so because in our fast-paced, begin to come in, they reflect on their findings. They 

rapidly changing world, finding time for contem- ask questions such the following: What do these 

plation can be difficult. Moreover, in our modern data mean? Could they mean two or more different 

science-dominated world, measurement tends to things? What are their implications for future study? 

be trusted more than reflection. As one academic In short, data do not interpret themselves. 

humorist put it, “In God we trust. All others bring 
data!” Because of these sentiments and biases toward 

KeEY PON eSS e 
measurement, you may not have had sufficient oppor- 
tunity to practice your skills of reflection. The gap between those who reflect and those who 

In truth, the gap between those who measure measure is narrower than it may seem. Both philoso- 
and those who reflect is not as great as it may phers and scientists are affected by physical realities 
seem. Most philosophers think that good empir- and by the force of ideas and meanings. 
ical experimentation is crucial and that the gains 
made by the natural sciences have been both 
impressive and useful. In addition, philosophers When scientists are good at making value 
who appreciate the cross-disciplinary nature of judgments and reflecting on meanings, their work 

our field use scientific findings to put parameters goes better. If they are not, their research never 
on their own work. For instance, in the philosophy gets off the ground, and their findings are never 
of mind, philosophers are very much aware of published in reputable journals. In short, scientists 

advances made in neurophysiology. Thus, philo- who cannot reflect skillfully and who are not good 
sophical claims about the nature of mind need to at uncovering the meanings associated with their 
be consistent with the findings of brain science. It data are unlikely to be very good scientists. 
could be the case that intelligence is the product Even though scientific and philosophical 
of an incredibly complex, computer-like brain. Or methods overlap in some ways, they are not the 
perhaps it is better to model thinking on chaos same. Reflective reasoning processes are central 
theory and dynamic systems. Perhaps intelligence to philosophical research, and three of them are 
is a single generic capability. Or maybe we have highlighted in the following sections (see figure 
multiple intelligences that have been developed 3.2) (Kretchmar 1994, 2011): 



Chapter 3| Philosophy of Physical Activity 7 = 

Inductive reasoning 

Starts with and develops 
specific cases... general principles. 

Deductive reasoning 

Starts with and examines 
general specifics. 
principles... 

Descriptive reasoning 

Looks at and describes 
one example... its essential 

qualities. 

GTTSERY Three types of philosophical reasoning. 

¢ Inductive reasoning particular those features that distinguish exercise 

¢ Deductive reasoning from activities such as dance, sport, and play. 
Once again, you would need to ensure that 

¢ Descriptive reasoning 
your examples were noncontroversial, or “safe,” 
and thus unlikely to contaminate your inductive 

Inductive Reasoning conclusions. You would also need to ensure that 
your generalizations were neither too narrow 

Inductive reasoning moves from examination of (e.g., exercise requires the use of equipment) nor 
a limited number of specific examples to broad, too broad (e.g., exercise requires a person who 
general conclusions. Most scientific research is moves). When conclusions are too narrow, they 
inductive because it measures a limited number are typically inaccurate (it is true that many types 
of specific examples or conducts a manageable of exercise require equipment, but some do not). 
number of trials and then draws larger conclu- When conclusions are too broad, they are unhelpful 
sions based on those measures. Induction is also (a performer is also required for sport, dance, or 
used by philosophers. For instance, you could use play, so this characteristic does not tell us much 
inductive reasoning to examine a metaphysical about what is unique to exercise). 
question about the nature of exercise. You could 
start by developing a list of examples of exercise 

Deductive Reasoning 
activities, such as participating in rhythmic aero- 
bics classes, training for strength to achieve better Deductive reasoning starts with one or more 
performance in football, lifting weights to develop broad premises and tries to identify conclusions 
muscles for a bodybuilding contest, mowing the that follow. For example, you might use deductive 
lawn, walking to work for lack of a car, and taking reasoning to determine whether a particular activity 
a daily walk at lunch to improve your health. You you happen to be observing is a sport. Let’s say that 
could then decide whether all of the items are you are attending your first chess tournament and 
genuine examples of exercise, eliminate any that are curious about whether chess should be identi- 

are questionable, and then identify the general or fied as a sport. You develop a major premise and a 

common characteristics of the remaining items—in minor premise as follows: If it is true that all sport 



mm Ss Introduction to Kinesiology 

requires the use of physical skills to solve its game A negative answer for any of these variations 
problems (major premise), and if it is true that chess should help you zero in on what is central to the 
does not require the use of physical skills to solve activity of basketball. If, on the other hand, a given 
its problems (minor premise), then it necessarily variation does not eliminate basketball, then the 

follows that chess is not sport. Of course, the validity variation in question is probably not crucial to the 
of this reasoning depends on the strength of the two identity or integrity of the game. 
premises. You might take issue with the first prem- One important research technique in which 
ise by asserting that physical skills should not be descriptive reasoning is often used is phenom- 
viewed as a requirement for sport. You might then enology. Phenomenologists, as Edmund Husserl 
argue further that chess deserves to be identified (1900/1970, p. 252) noted, are guided by the 
as a sport because it is a competitive game. On this requirement that they “return to the things them- 
alternative view, one that requires you to reject the selves.” This means they should get back in touch 
major premise, all games that involve competition with their experiences and examine them in order 
are sports, whether or not they involve physical skill. to determine what exactly they mean. As we saw 

with the basketball example, variations help phe- 

Descriptive Reasoning nomenologists distinguish meanings that are cen- 
tral from those that are peripheral. For example, 

Descriptive reasoning involves looking at one playing outdoors rather than indoors does little 
example of a thing or activity and describing its to change the phenomenon of basketball, but if 
essential qualities. In order to zero in on those people use ladders to score baskets then something 
essential features, you can vary the characteristics more central or essential to the game has been 
of the object under scrutiny. For example, you lost. The essence of basketball, in other words, 
might imagine slightly altered forms of basketball is tethered to the unique nature of the basketball 
and then determine whether they constitute the problem, not to situational variables such as indoor 
same game. What do you think about the following versus outdoor courts or wood-floored gymnasiums 
variations on the sport of basketball? Would each versus asphalt playgrounds. 
one still be basketball? 

¢ Changing the goal of the game from win- 
ning to achieving a tied score at the end of —eKEY POINT e=~ e 
the contest Inductive reasoning begins with specific cases or 

¢ Eliminating all restrictions on the means exemplars and develops broad conclusions from them. 
of scoring a basket, thus making it legal, Deductive reasoning begins with broad premises and 
for example, to use a stepladder under the determines specific conclusions. Descriptive reasoning 
basket or to stand on a teammate’s shoulders 

begins with one example and varies it to see how dra- 
¢ Playing on an outdoor court rather than in matically the phenomenon changes, thereby uncovering 

an indoor facility its most important characteristics. 

Subdisciplinary Highlight 
The Nature of Esports 

Esports are not new, but their popularity has grown markedly in the last decade or so, especially, 
albeit not exclusively, among young people. This growth has led to, and is reflected in, the growing 
body of literature within the philosophy of sport that discusses the nature of esports. On the one 
hand, there are scholars like Dennis Hemphill (2005) who believe that esports can be considered 
sports. On the other hand, there are scholars like Jim Parry (2019) who argue the opposite. The 
answer to the question of whether esports are truly sports is extremely important not only because 
of the increasing role that digital technology plays in everyday life, but also because it would have 
a significant impact in different areas of professional and personal life. Consider, for example, how 
the prevailing approach to esports would affect how educational authorities, parks and recreation 
officials, sport managers, health experts, and parents would organize their activities and programs. It 
is clear that philosophers of sport have much to contribute to this complex and fascinating discussion. 



Chapter 3 |P hilosophy of Physical Activity 

History and Future of Philosophy scholarly publication for the subdiscipline, and the 
first issue of the Journal of the Philosophy of Sport 

of Physical Activity appeared in 1974 with Bob Osterhoudt as its editor. 
Although there had been philosophical analyses of Philosophy of sport as a distinct subdiscipline 
athletic activity throughout history, albeit sparse, grew slowly. At least three reasons can be given 
it was not until the 1960s that the philosophy of for this. First, both philosophers and philoso- 
sport began to emerge as a field of study. By then, phy-of-sport classes were few and far between 

U.S. physical educators studying the philosophy because many departments of physical education 
of physical activity were pursuing new directions and kinesiology emphasized the natural sciences. 

by distancing themselves from educational philos- In fact, some schools that had multiple physiolo- 

ophy and from the single profession of physical gists, biomechanists, and motor control specialists 

education. Instead, they began using philosophical did not have a single sport philosopher. Second, the 

techniques to produce new insights about physi- cognate area of philosophy is uniquely conserva- 

cal activity itself—especially sport. This approach tive. Many philosophers who resided in philosophy 

attracted a few scholars in other disciplines as well. departments preferred not to be associated with a 

Two of the most important physical educators in group that studied sport. They stayed away from 

this vanguard were Eleanor Metheny (Connotations meetings that addressed sport and physical activity 

of Movement in Sport and Dance, 1965; Movement and chose not to publish in the Journal of the Phi- 

and Meaning, 1968) and Howard Slusher (Man, losophy of Sport. Third, early philosophers of sport 

Sport, and Existence: A Critical Analysis, 1967), worked hard to separate themselves from education 

both of whom were active in doctoral education and other applied fields. As a result, they produced 

at the University of Southern California. Also at the very abstract literature that was often difficult to 

forefront of this interest in sport was philosopher read and was perceived as having little utility. 

Paul Weiss (Sport: A Philosophic Inquiry, 1969), Over the past three decades, however, changes 

then at Yale. In a nutshell, their contri have occurred that favor philosophy of sport. First, 
butions were 

as follows: Metheny conceptualized movement as appreciation has grown for cross-disciplinary study 

a source of insight and meaning for individuals; and the role that philosophy, history, and the social 
 

Slusher used existential perspectives to examine sciences can play in interdisciplinary research. For 

how sport enhances our authenticity as human example, guidelines from a number of funding 

beings, as well as our freedom and responsi agencies indicate that single-discipline research 
bility; 

and Weiss celebrated the pursuit of excellence in is often constrained and ineffectual and that col- 

spor laboration across disciplines is to be encouraged. 
t. 
In the middle of the country, physical educa- Second, philosophers in parent disciplines are 

tor Earle Zeigler mentored a group of graduate beginning to show up more regularly at meetings 

students at the University of Illinois, and another about the philosophy of sport, and the literature 

important center of doctoral education developed continues to improve in both quantity and quality. 
Contributions to the Journal of the Philosophy of 

at Ohio State University under the leadership of 
Sport are now more balanced between sport-study 

Seymour Kleinman. Zeigler wrote about philosoph- 
and philosophy scholars. In addition, the creation 

ical schools of thought and prominent philosophers 
of Sport, Ethics and Philosophy (2007) and Fair- 

while extrapolating implications of their work for 
Play. Journal of Philosophy, Ethics and Sports Law 

the field of physical education. Kleinman focused 
(2013) have increased opportunities for refereed 

on philosophical analyses of movement, dance, 
publication in the philosophy of sport. Third, the 

Eastern movement forms, and the bodily dimen- 
emphasis on practical ethics in philosophical cir- 

sions of being human. 
cles as well as the concern with pressing ethical 

In 1972, discussions between Weiss, Warren 
issues in sport (i.e., cheating, commercialism, 

Fraleigh (State University of New York at Brock- 
performance enhancement, gender equity, among 

port), and German philosopher Hans Lenk at the 
many others) and the need to provide guidance 

Olympic Scientific Congress in Munich led to the 
for decision making in sport have also generated 

formation of the Philosophic Society for the Study 
momentum for the philosophy of sport. 

of Sport (PSSS), now known as the International 
Finally, we have seen the philosophy of sport 

Association for the Philosophy of Sport. Fraleigh 
become more accepted at universities around the 

was the key organizer and continued to be cen- 
world. Whereas activity in the 1960s and 1970s was 

trally involved as the organization developed. The 

PSSS almost immediately set about sponsoring a confined largely to North America, vibrant groups 



wa GO Introduction to Kinesiology 

of scholars and teachers now exist in Australia, the same logic holds. If you are going to use play 

Great Britain, South Korea, and Japan as well as or exercise as an intervention to promote human 

in several Latin American, Scandinavian, and Euro- welfare, you must first know what it is to be human. 

pean countries. The philosophy of sport is also In short, the intervention must be appropriate for 

growing, albeit slowly, in other parts of the world. the recipient; therefore, it is with the recipient that 

This positive activity notwithstanding, the fate we should begin our analysis. 
of sport philosophy in North American kinesiology Philosophers have taken many positions on 
departments, as Peter M. Hopsicker and Douglas what human beings are. Human beings have been 
Hochstetler (2016) have recently noted, remains described as social animals, symbolic creatures, 

uncertain. Due to various factors—including individuals controlled by subconscious drives, 
the dominance of the biological sciences over products of economics, composites of two elements 
the humanities, the emphasis on securing large (mind and body), composites of three elements 
external grants, and the push for scientific spe- (mind, body, and spirit), and mere machines (albeit 

cialization—relatively few doctoral programs in complex ones) and thus little more than collections 
philosophy of sport remain in the United States, of atoms. We have also been described both as 
and philosophy of sport classes have declined in free and idiosyncratic and as controlled and fully 
many kinesiology programs. Thus, while there is predictable. Although all of these positions may 
much to be optimistic about for the future of the merit some attention, we focus here on three that 
philosophy of sport, there remain several areas in are labeled as follows: materialism, dualism, and 
which improvement is needed. holism. If you understand these three, you will have 

a reasonably good grasp of fundamental positions 
that can be taken on the nature of the human 

Overview of Knowledge in Philosophy being. You should also have a good grasp of the 

of Physical Activity implications of these positions for kinesiology and 
the movement professions. 

A number of important topics exist in the philos- 
ophy of physical activity. Although scholars have Materialism 
produced a broad, complex literature related to Perhaps the simplest and most straightforward 
human movement, we examine here only a few position on human nature is captured by mate- 
examples of the insights produced by this fasci- rialism. Philosophers call it a monistic position 
nating subdiscipline. Specifically, we examine the because it posits the person as being made of only 
following: one thing—namely, atoms. According to this view, 

¢ Who our clients are and what a person is all that truly exists in the world are atoms and void. 

¢ Why sport, competition, and play are so The human being, including the body, the blood, 

popular the wiring, the brain—all of the human being—is 
nothing more than a complex machine. From this 

¢ What values are connected to physical 
materialistic perspective, the brain can be likened 

activity 
to an incredibly sophisticated computer, and the 

¢ What sport ethics requires body is cast as a combination of very complex lever 
systems, motors, wiring, and plumbing. 

Who Are Our Clients? Consciousness for materialists is often thought of 

How are we to understand the nature of the people as a kind of sideshow. Although these philosophers 

we serve? Some sport philosophers believe that you may acknowledge that subjective experiences are 

should begin your work on understanding human real, materialists do not believe these experiences 

movement with the adjective (i.e., human) before have any power or efficacy. Instead, they view ideas 

you get to the noun (i.e., movement). We follow and values as products of brain states; moreover, 

that recommendation here. That is, we look at they assert that physical brain states are what make 
who moves before we get to the nature and value things happen. 

of movement itself in forms such as play, games, This is a no-nonsense kind of philosophical 
sport, and competition. position. What you see is what you get! The person 

Good reasons exist for using this sequence appears to be an impressive material object . . . 
in dealing with philosophical knowledge. It can and is! Nothing more, nothing less. We need not 
be argued that we must understand the person rely on spooky substances like mind or spirit to 
before we can understand how and why he or she account for human behavior. Neither, however, 
is attracted to games and play. For practitioners, should we discount the considerable capabilities 



Chapter 3| Philosophy of Physical Activity 61 

of this powerful machine. Once we gain the ability psychologists, and even some sociologists and phi- 
to measure and understand all parts of the organ- losophers of sport began looking for “underlying 
ism, all human capabilities will be accounted for mechanisms” (the holy grail of materialism)—that 
in terms of atoms and void, along with the laws is, the multiple physical causes that, when com- 
of physics, chemistry, and other natural sciences. bined, would explain the whole. 

Materialistic accounts of persons were popular 
in the time of Plato and even before, but they Dualism 
became ever more prominent during the period of Some philosophers appreciate the simplicity and 
the Scientific Revolution beginning in the 16th cen- honesty of materialism yet doubt that conscious- 
tury. The careful skepticism inherent in scientific ness can be cast aside so quickly and easily. In 
inquiry, the emphasis on measurement, the onset other words, they doubt that human behavior can 
of the Copernican revolution and the realization be accounted for by looking only for underlying 
that the Earth is not the center of it all, the rise of mechanisms or only for material causes. While 
Newtonian physics and the increased appreciation acknowledging that human beings have a body 
of causal relationships, the invention of the micro- that works very much like a machine, these philos- 
scope and the clock, and the decline of religious ophers argue that people are also endowed with 
authority—all of these developments and others a mind, with consciousness, with a steady stream 
encouraged human beings to think of themselves of very concrete emotions and ideas. Moreover, 
as simply one kind of physical object among others. these subjective states have power. Ideas of love 

The assumptions and perspectives associated and hope and justice, for example, can (and do) 
with materialism were adopted by many physical change our behavior. In addition, on this view, it 
educators and exercise scientists, who began to is the ideas that do the work—not just the physical 
study the person as a complex, mobile machine. brain states that accompany them. 
More specifically, physiologists, biomechanists, When these philosophers are asked how many 
motor control and motor learning experts, sport parts go into the production of a human being, 

skyrt? 

skye? 

According to dualists, two distinct things are present here: A physical handshake and the nonphysical idea of positive 

sporting conduct. 
AAMIR QURESHI/AFP via Getty Images 



MM 62 Introduction to Kinesiology 

their answer is two: mind and body. Thus, instead pools and catching baseballs and performing pirou- 
of being monists like the materialists, they are ettes. Many have expressed their respect for both of 
identified as dualists. René Descartes, perhaps our human elements and the close interrelationship 
the most articulate and forceful of the modern between them, as the Roman poet Juvenal did when 
dualists, said that a person was composed of two he argued for “a sound mind in a sound body” in 
substances—one that is extended in space (body) the poem SatireX and as Jesse Feiring Williams did 
and one whose nature it is to think (mind). when he proposed an idealistic “education through 

Dualism is an attractive philosophical position the physical” (Williams, 1930, p. 279). 
because our intuitions and daily experiences sug- 
gest that our thoughts must count for something. Holism 

We have an idea, we draw up a plan reflectively, More recently, a third position—holism—has 
and then we act on it. We have an exciting idea, and received a considerable amount of attention. In 
everything from our heart rate to our outlook on some ways, it can be considered a middle position 
life is affected. In short, dualism can be attractive between monistic materialism and mind-body dual- 
because it takes ideas seriously. ism. Holism takes seriously both the mechanistic 

Many physical educators and exercise scientists and the thoughtful sides of our human nature, but 
are dualists because they believe that consciousness it refuses to separate them. In other words, it argues 
is real and that nonphysical ideas somehow invade that our physical nature, all the way from our anat- 
the world of motor behavior—of swimming across omy to our genes, is always shaped and influenced 

Kinesiology Colleagues 

Jesus Ilundain-Agurruza 
Dr. Jesus llundain-Agurruza teaches 
a philosophy of mind course unlike 
any other in the U.S. curriculum. 
His course should allay the worries 
of Richard Shusterman, pioneer 
of somaesthetics (a cultural-phil- 
osophical appreciation of embod- 
iment), that perhaps somaes- 
thetics cannot be incorporated 
into the standard philosophical 
curriculum found in Europe or 
the United States. Fortunately, 
llundain-Agurruza’s classroom is 
anything but typical because it 
richly incorporates disciplined yet 
playful movement. 

Contemporary philosophy of 
mind is notoriously technical 
and centered on both metaphys- 
ical and neuroscientific issues. Resear 
Ilundain-Agurruza’s course 
implements a radically holistic 
pedagogy that integrates both theory and practice, both thinking and moving, and 
both Asian and Western philosophies. It includes weekly swordplay practice that combines medi- 
eval European and Japanese techniques. Wielding wooden swords, students come to learn about 
and connect the more technical theoretical aspects with felt movement. They cut and parry their 
way through recent and cutting-edge philosophical analyses, such as radical enactivism and Asian 
notions of consciousness. The course also instills emotional intelligence and temperance. That is, it 
teaches meditative techniques and philosophical principles meant for use in duels and in stressful 
situations such as exams—all while conducting a rigorous philosophical examination of the mind. 



Chapter 3| Philosophy of Physical Activity 63 

by emotions and ideas. Likewise, our subjective reflection and verbalization. Thus, behavior can be 
experiences are always shaped and influenced by more or less mechanistic or more or less creative. 
our physicality. In short, we never get one without However, no behavior is simply mechanical, and 
the other. Thus, neither the physical nor the thought- no actions result from an independent mind giving 
ful side of our nature has any independence. We are instructions to a dependent body. Once again, all 
thoroughly ambiguous—whether one is looking at behavior is ambiguous. 
an injured knee or a child playing soccer. Kinesiologists and physical educators have seen 

The central tenet of holism shows its diametric the relevance of holism for their own work. Among 
Opposition to materialism. Holists argue that the other things, it has expanded the significance of 
whole is more than the sum of its parts. On this physical activity as something that counts as cre- 
view, no matter how sophisticated our measurement ative, intelligent behavior in its own right, without 
techniques become, underlying mechanisms will the addition of theory or other propositions. Holism 
never give us a complete picture of human behavior. has increased the significance of the body in under- 

standing human nature and behavior. Holists, unlike 
materialists and dualists, do not say that we have a 

TAS ST Le ce a er body. Rather, they argue that we are our bodies—or 
How we deal with people (e.g., cure, educate, or teach more accurately, as some Zen Buddhists say, we are 
them) is affected by what we think a person is. If we simply bodymind! Finally, holism has expanded the 

carry false impressions of human nature, we risk using kinds of interventions designed to improve health or 

inappropriate, ineffectual, or dangerous interventions. repair injury. Rather than working on the plumbing 
(cardiovascular system), fixing a hinge (e.g., knee), 
or manipulating the computer (i.e., brain), we can 

Philosophers who are often identified as cham- intervene at multiple levels, from our embodied 
pions of holism include William James, John Dewey, ideas and aspirations to our idea-affected or idea- 
and Maurice Merleau-Ponty. They all claim that it is shaped cells. Holistic medicine is now taken seri- 
unhelpful to think of a person in terms of parts or ously in many quarters. A “bad back,” for instance, 
dichotomies such as mind and body. They all also can be addressed by any number of interrelated 
believe that intelligence works on many levels, from therapies, such as meditation, yoga, chiropractic 
mere nonverbal reflex behavior to creative action to manipulations, pharmaceuticals, and surgery. 

Perspectives on Health | 

Many of you will be entering a profession in which you are hired and paid to promote good health. 
As noted in the previous Key Point, how you conceptualize good health can be affected by the 
position you take on the nature of the person. Materialists, dualists, and holists see health through 
different lenses and promote health in different ways. Here is a brief summary of some of these 
tendencies: 

>» Materialists. Good health is the absence of disease or defect. A healthy person is a well-func- 
tioning machine. Interventions are physical in nature: surgery, pharmaceuticals, biomechanical 
aids, physiological and neurological treatments, and appropriate kinds of exercise. A priority is 
placed on discovering and addressing underlying causes of health problems. 

>» Dualists. Good health is a sound mind in a sound body. A healthy person is composed of a 
well-functioning machine (body) that is monitored and run by informed thought processes (mind). 
Interventions are bimodal in two ways, in terms of sequence and in terms of target or objective. The 

former places understanding and motivation (functions of the mind) before proper health behaviors 

(functions carried out by the body). The latter emphasizes different targets or objectives in the 

person—psychiatric or spiritual interventions for the mind and material interventions for the body. 

> Holists. Good health is overall wellness. Healthy people are well adjusted and can function 

effectively in their environment and in terms of their personal life story and goals. Because all 

aspects of the person are interrelated, interventions can be aimed at different levels. Interventions 

at the level of thoughts and attitudes will affect wellness at the level of the cells—and vice versa. 

All interventions are essentially bodymind. 



mae 64 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Why Are Sport, Competition, lenges us to solve it. This artificiality constitutes 
one dimension of sport’s popularity. 

and Play So Popular? 
Sport occupies a prominent place in modern society, Sport as Showcase for Motor Skills 
not only in the United States but virtually every- In light of this definition of games, we can describe 
where in the world. From the professional sport sport as a game in which motor skills are required 
ranks to friendly pickup games to modifications to reach its goal. In soccer, for example, the objec- 
used in physical education classes and summer tive is to get the ball over the goal line, between 
camps, the different modalities of sport touch the the goalposts, and under the crossbar. Furthermore, 
lives of a vast number of people. What makes sport the rules prohibit certain actions that might oth- 
so attractive? Where does its value reside? To answer erwise increase participants’ ability to accomplish 
these questions, let us consider the structure of sport the testing objective (in this case, getting the ball 
as a unique kind of game that can be experienced into the goal). Here are some examples of such 
both competitively and playfully. restrictions, most of them designed to test certain 

physical skills: 

4e42 62) || ee  ¢ Each team may have only 11 players on the 
field at one time. 

Sport’s popularity presents us with a philosophical 
question: What accounts for the allure of competition, ¢ With some exceptions, field players may not 

use their hands to control the ball. 
play, and games? 

¢ Players taking a penalty kick must kick the 
ball forward. 

¢ Players may not prevent goalkeepers from 
Sport Grounded in Artificial Problems 

releasing the ball from their hands. 
Games are peculiar activities. They are created 

¢ During free kicks, all opponents must be at 
by a set of rules specifying a goal to be achieved 

least 10 yards from the ball. 
and limiting the means that participants can use 
to reach that goal. The rules exist to create the ¢ Goalkeepers may not touch the ball with 
challenges of the game. In contrast, imposing such their hands after it has been deliberately 
rules would be absurd in ordinary life (Suits, 1978), kicked to them by a teammate. 

where it would be senseless to make our workaday 
The restrictions imposed by the rules of soccer 

activities more difficult than they already are. 
provide the sport with its distinctive artificiality, 

Games, therefore, are constructed or artificial 
which is recognized by, and has captured the atten- 

problems (Kretchmar, 2004; Morgan, 1994). The 
tion of, people around the world. More generally, the 

built-in inefficiencies imposed by game rules 
gratuitous invitations offered by various sports to 

differ from the inefficiencies encountered in other 
test particular sets of motor skills represent another 

realms of life—for example, in education, politics, 
dimension of sport’s popularity. Clearly, sport is a 

and business—where limits on efficiency come 
game meant primarily to test our motor skills. 

mainly from ethical constraints. For instance, we 
cannot make writing easier by copying someone Sport and the Creation of Excellence 
else’s essay and calling it our own. That would be and Meaning 
an act of plagiarism, which constitutes a serious 
breach of ethics. Game rules, however, constrain Rules are game cues that allow us to formalize the 

us in gratuitous or unnecessary ways that are not artificial problem of a given game. They clarify 

occasioned by ethics. what should be accomplished and how it should 

Almost any activity can be turned into a game be accomplished. Thus, it is within the rules of a 

by imposing gratuitous difficulties. Think about the game that the skills meant to be tested become 

ordinary activity of studying for a test. You could relevant and therefore valuable. Otherwise, what 

turn it into a game by putting time limits on your would people think of jumping to shoot a ball 

reading, attempting to read backward, or reading into a hoop or hitting a ball with a solid piece of 

exclusively in a dimly lit room. These methods are wood and then running around between padded 

not the most efficient ways to study for a test, but cushions? These skills, known as jump shooting and 

they do turn the activity into a game. In this way, batting, are recognized as components of basketball 

nearly any activity can be converted into a game, and baseball, respectively, because of the rules of 
which, as an artificial problem, invites and chal- these sports. More broadly, rules allow sport to be 



Chapter 3| Philosophy of Physical Activity 

practiced by diverse people and open the door for (Torres, 2000, 2018). Thus, a sport’s distinguishing 
the creation of excellence and the emergence of set of motor skills provides another component that 
meaning, both in sport and in our life narratives— differentiates it from other sports and may well 
all of which helps explain why sport has become account for a given sport’s popularity. Moreover, 
a worthwhile human project. motor skills represent the standards of excellence 

Thus, engaging in acts that would be considered by which players evaluate their performance. 
inconsequential in ordinary life also facilitates Aspiring to reach and expand a sport’s standard 
the exploration of our capabilities in a protected of excellence also provides meaning and value for 
environment. To keep that exploration appealing, our involvement in the sport, and more generally 
we often modify the rules of sport so that the arti- for our lives. This significance is part of what we 
ficial problem does not become too easy or too find appealing about sport. 
difficult to solve. People seem attracted to sport 
when accomplishing the goal is challenging yet Sport and Fair Competition 
lies within the reach of their capacities. Neither So far, we have not focused on competition. This is 
foregone conclusions nor unworkable feats are because sport is not necessarily competitive. Any 
good conditions for preserving sport’s meaning. sport, or any game for that matter, can be organized 

Just as rules are indispensable in crafting and both competitively and noncompetitively. Noncom- 
preserving the distinctive artificiality of sport, the petitive sport requires participants to engage fully 
deployment of motor skills is indispensable in in trying to meet the challenge set by the rules. 
instantiating sport. For instance, successful partic- Think about a person who uses a wheelchair and 
ipation in soccer requires proficiency in kicking, tests herself by seeing how fast she can cover a 
passing, running, and tackling, among other motor distance of 400 meters. Facing such a challenge 
skills. Indeed, soccer expertise involves a blend can be fun and meaningful even though it involves 
of these motor skills. Rather than being generic no comparison, no ranking, and no competition. 
in nature, soccer skills are highly specialized. This By contrast, competitive sport requires not only 
specialization emerges both from the test estab- engaging fully in trying to meet the challenge set by 
lished by soccer’s rulebook—which sets the goal the rules but also trying to establish athletic supe- 
to be accomplished and the means allowed (and riority. After a contest, for instance, a wheelchair 
prohibited) in pursuing it—and from the players’ racer learns how fast she can cover 400 meters and 
ingenuity in negotiating it. how she fares in comparison with her opponents. 

This is the case not only for soccer but for all Similarly, in a full-fledged competitive game, a 
sports, because the rulebook of each sport indicates rugby team learns two things—how well it does 
the set of motor skills that it is designed to test on the test provided by the sport per se and how 

Professional Issues in Kinesiology | 

Equality and Fair Play 
What is required for fair play in athletic competition? The principle of equality demands that contes- 
tants adhere to the rulebook in order to guarantee that everybody has the same formal opportunity 
to advance in competition. Many philosophers also argue that contestants should abide by the 
“spirit” of the rulebook, which is typically articulated as requiring respect for opponents and the 
promotion of legitimate comparisons of the contestants’ motor skills. 

But is this all? What about access to coaching and facilities? Or the ability to pay for travel, 

equipment, and specialized health care, among other areas of potential inequality brought about 

by differences in socioeconomic status? Doesn't fair play demand that all who so desire have 

equivalent opportunities to participate in sport and develop their sporting capabilities? How mean- 

ingful are victories if they mainly reflect socioeconomic inequalities rather than talent, merit, and 

effort? Promoting fair play is more challenging than we tend to think. For a solid analysis of fair 

play and the challenges it poses, see Sigmund Loland'’s Fair Play: A Moral Norm System (2002). 

Citation style: APA 
Loland, S. (2002). Fair play: Am oral norm system. Routledge. 



a 66 Introduction to Kinesiology 

good it is in comparison with its rival. activity started, they recede into the background as 

Competition requires that contestants share we take great pleasure in experiencing our biking 

the same test and commit themselves to surpass- skills. In such moments, biking is lived primarily 

ing each other’s performance (Kretchmar, 1975). as an activity that we like simply for what it is and 

When individuals enter the world of competitive for the quality of experience it provides. 

sport, they enter a community that defines itself in When sport or physical activity, or any activity 

terms of the unique test they share. Here, testing for that matter, is lived in a playful mode, it becomes 
evaluations and competitive comparisons form a something dear to us. In a sense, it becomes 
decisive unity. Although competition determines ingrained in who we are. At play, we forget about 
winners and losers, something more valuable may time, obligations, and the usual roles we fulfill in 
be at stake: the attempt to challenge each other life; instead, we surrender to the magnetism of the 

to achieve excellence (Simon et al., 2015). This playground and experience the doing as valuable in 
view of competition highlights the value of per- itself (Kretchmar, 2005; Torres, 2002). Playful sport 

formance and cherishes the process as much as it and physical activity are characterized by what 
values the outcomes that result from contestants’ could be described as an exuberance of being; they 
performances (Torres & McLaughlin, 2003). That involve feelings of freedom, spontaneity, creativity, 
is, excellent performance transcends mere winning joy, and meaning. To put it in a more pedestrian 
and losing and can even become the central value fashion, play feels good! We also know that this 
of competitive sport. Thus, the pursuit of athletic extraordinary way of embracing and experiencing 
superiority, doing better than one’s opponent, the world is fragile and temporary. However, even 
stands as another possibility for explaining the though play cannot be guaranteed by command, it 
widespread popularity of sport. is more likely to appear if we predispose ourselves 

to find it by being patient, respectful, ingenious, 
Sport as Delightful Play and caring with the activity we are engaged in and 
We have seen that sport is a goal-oriented activity where it is taking place. 
structured by rules that impose limitations on how As professionals, we can develop strategies to 
we can go about attaining the goal. This is done help our students and clients find play in a variety 
primarily to test our proficiency in using a given set of potential playgrounds. The challenge for us in 
of motor skills. We have also seen that this activity this capacity is to facilitate growth in the recipro- 
can be organized just to evaluate our proficiency cal relationship between players and playgrounds. 
in solving the test or, in addition, to compare our The playground shapes and affects the player, who 
skills with those of an opponent. Another distinc- becomes, for instance, “basketballed,” “bicycled,” 
tion matters as well: Sport may be encountered or “table tennised.” In turn, the player affects the 
as play. Here, we explore the differences between playground, which is shaped by the player’s person- 
playful and dutiful modes of experiencing sport ality, goals, and personal history. Thus, basketball 
and physical activity—both of which help explain becomes “Mary-ed,” “John-ed,” or “Susie-ed.” 
their popularity. Play can be fostered in both competitive and 

We have all tasted the delight and mesmeric noncompetitive sports. Many athletes, both casual 
quality of play, yet it is a difficult phenomenon and professional, are clearly drawn not only by the 
to conceptualize. Although play is found during activity’s instrumental value but also to the process 
engagement in an activity, it does not equate with of doing the activity—that is, to an internal focus. 
the activity itself. Rather, play is the manner in Similarly, play does not recognize differences in 
which we approach, embrace, and experience the age, gender, race, religion, socioeconomic status, 
activity (Meier, 1980). Play requires an autotelic or motor skill development. It is not the exclusive 
attitude, in contrast with all forms of instrumental property of any particular group, which means 
or utilitarian orientation toward the world. This that it does not have to be restricted to children 
distinction means that while at play, we are inter- and retirees, as is often the case with conceptions 
ested not in any payoffs that might come from of play in contemporary society. We are always at 
participating in a given activity but rather in the risk of finding play, or being found by it, or both 
activity itself. In other words, when we are at play, (Kretchmar, 1994). The key is to be aware of and 
the doing supplies its own reward. For example, embrace such risks! The magnetism of play, and the 
a playful encounter with biking is experienced as way we live an activity while at play, make play an 
utterly absorbing and fulfilling. Even if extrinsic essential component of our lives. No wonder some 
rewards and goals were of concern when the people have recommended that we live our lives 



Chapter 3 |P hilosophy of Physical Activity C7 a 

effects. That is, sport and physical activity are pre- 
sented as valuable because they help us improve 
ourselves in concrete and desirable ways, such as 
preserving our health, teaching civil and moral 
values, fostering national pride, and combating 
sedentary living and obesity. This account is clearly 
based on utility, which has been emphasized for 
years as a rationale by many professionals in the 
field. When sport and physical activity are formu- 
lated in this way, we are likely to approach them as 
means to an end, as pursuits that we must engage 

in. In short, they become a form of duty, a way 
of participating that provides a clear contrast to 
playful sport and physical activity. 

Sport and physical activity are more likely to be 
encountered as a form of duty when the focus is 
placed on external rewards. In contrast, playlike 
sport and physical activity are self-contained. As a 
way to live these activities, play accentuates their 
intrinsic values and ends. At play, sport and physi- 
cal activity are experienced as delightful, absorbing, 
and meaningful; thus, they allow us to show our 
human potential. 

There is nothing inherently wrong in regarding 
sport and physical activity as pursuits that pro- 
duce external rewards. Doing so, however, tends 
to diminish their intrinsic worth. The more we 
remind ourselves that our participation in sport 
and physical activity produces good results, the 
less we are prone to relish their intrinsic meaning 
and value. In other words, the more we talk about 
dutiful sport and physical activity, the less we talk 
about their potential to foster play. One case in 

Physical activity that brings us joy and pleasure is point is the popular and well-intended Exercise 
delightful play. Is Medicine program. Medicine typically does not 
© Bananastock taste very good, even if we need it to make us well; 

thus, it is shortsighted to equate physical activity 
with medicine. 

by fostering as much play as possible (Lasch, 1979; In summary, there is much to be said about 
Morgan, 1982; Pieper, 1952), and no wonder that promoting good outcomes through the practice of 
play is so often associated with sport and physical sport and physical activity, but we should not do 
activity. Don’t you think this association helps us so at the expense of play by emphasizing only the 
understand people’s attraction to sport? expected results of a workout. In addition, even 

the most committed and cautious among us would 
Sport as Beneficial Duty welcome the addition of some delight and sensu- 
A second mode of experiencing sport and physical ousness to our training regimen. Tedious duty can 
activity also helps explain sport’s attractiveness. It take us only so far. The beneficial effects produced 
differs markedly from the play model because it by dutiful sport and physical activity are important, 
focuses not on the process but on the payoffs of and they illuminate the social acceptance of these 
participation in sport and physical activity. This pursuits. However, their limitations should not be 
model supports many of the most common argu- overlooked. After all, when sport and physical activ- 
ments used to include physical activity in education ity become just workloads, we often cannot wait 
and in personal exercise programs: the power of to escape them, in spite of their payoffs, in order 

sport and physical activity to bring about beneficial to pursue more intrinsically rewarding projects. 



ml 6s Introduction to Kinesiology 

Meaningful Combinations of Sport, Play, activity and an active lifestyle to health, physical 
fitness, organic well-being, socialization, education, 

and Competition 
and character development. The potential of physical 

In an effort to explain sport’s allure and popular- activity and an active lifestyle to enhance one’s life in 
ity, we noted that it offers an intriguing physical these areas is central to kinesiology and should be 
problem. It invites us to give it a try. It asks us to welcomed. However, the emphasis on their extrin- 
find an answer to its riddles. The physicality of the sic worth tends to obscure other, more profound 
test provides further reasons for skillful, embodied and vital values associated with physical activity 
individuals like us to enter its domain. Sport offers and an active lifestyle. These values can exceed 
sensuous problems. When sport is experienced 

the practical benefits because they concern one’s 
playfully, the testing becomes intrinsically mean- 

whole being and existence. Following are six values 
ingful and even more delightful. This combination 

(Torres, 2020) encountered when one embarks on 
of sport and play makes us more likely to continue 

physical activity and an active lifestyle and commits 
our relationship with sport and physical activity. 

to improving athletic performance. They are equally 
If a sporting test is appealing in itself, many of 

significant and might overlap and combine in var- 
us encounter yet another layer of meaning when 

ious forms and to different degrees. Notice that, 
competition is added to the mix. This combination 

while they supersede the extrinsic worth of physical 
of sport and competition offers not only the uncer- 

activity and an active lifestyle, they encompass it. 
tainty and tension of taking our chances in solving 
the sporting problem but also the ambiguity and The Value of Achieving 
drama of learning how we will fare in comparison 

To achieve means to accomplish a task successfully. 
with our opponents—and the tighter the contest, 

It requires intention, progression, and exertion 
the more attractive the comparison. This is not 

through skills and ingenuity. It implies performing 
surprising given people’s interest in competition, 

well and with some form of excellence. Philosopher 
whether athletic or of some other type. 

Thomas Hurka (1993 and 2011) argues that achiev- 
An even more powerful combination occurs 

ing is good because it can make one’s life cohere. 
when a sporting test is shared competitively and 

Achievement that features complex and far-reaching 
lived in a playful mode. What a formidable triad this 

goals, requires cooperation and provision, extends 
is! When competitive sport is experienced playfully, 

over a period of time, and demands precision is more 
we focus on and thoroughly enjoy the doing while 

valuable than achievement that lacks these charac- 
aiming for excellence—not just victory—among 

teristics. Sport and many other forms of physical 
fellow sportspeople who are collaborating in a 
common project. If sport as a test is attractive, and activity constitute this kind of superior achieving 

that, in light of their demands, can unify one’s life 
if competitive sport is doubly attractive, then com- 
petitive sport experienced as play stands as a triple and make it worth living. Another way of showing 

delight. In this form, sport stands as a project of the importance of achieving is to reflect on the dis- 

problem solving that has been robustly enhanced. appointment that accompanies underachieving or 
failing to achieve. This means that the gratification 
of athletic achieving, and its related narratives, can 

The Value of Physical Activity, an Active produce deep satisfaction, something that can be 
Lifestyle, and Athletic Performance listed as one of the best things in life. 

Physical activity and an active lifestyle are typically 
The Value of Making Oneself 

valued for their extrinsic worth. That is, they are 
embraced for their important benefits. Consider, for Physical activity and an active lifestyle, and a com- 

example, the well-known contributions of physical mitment to improving one’s athletic performance, 

How Movement Playgrounds Are Created 

Given that play serves as a valuable ally in promoting movement across the life Span, it behooves 
you to become good at “growing playgrounds” for your students and clients. To that end, takea  
few minutes now to develop a list of dos and don'ts as a professional playmaker. In doing so, 
consider what you have learned in this unit about the attractiveness of sport and physical activity, 
the nature of games, the values of competition, and the qualities of play. ' 

ie x 



Chapter 3| Philosophy of Physical Activity 

allow one to make a life for oneself—to develop a ones. The physical sensation of cycling feels good, 
self. Choosing consciously and willingly one’s own as does being totally at ease while engaged in it, 
life course and substance is known as self-determi- but when one feels confident about life because 
nation or autonomy—the authoritative governing of this concentration and dedication to cycling, it 
of oneself. The more we determine the course and feels even better. This state of deep satisfaction with 
substance of our own lives, setting aside other life one’s life could rightfully be called happiness. A 
options, the more we become enmeshed in and life devoted to physical activity can make a large 
identified with our chosen endeavor. Our deep- contribution to one’s happiness while also provid- 
ening devotion to the endeavor is what enmeshes ing Opportunities to encounter less significant, but 
us in it and makes us identify with it. In a most nonetheless relevant, good feelings. 
relevant sense, the endeavor becomes who we 
are. That is why people who choose to run, climb The Value of Connecting With the Spiritual 
mountains, or play basketball define themselves The spirit has been described as that which is 
as runners, mountain climbers, or basketballers. fundamental to and enlivens the self. It invigorates 
These endeavors allow them to affirm who they and identifies the qualities not only of oneself 
are, which requires a deep reflection on both their but also of one’s group. Spirituality, then, is the 
potential and their limitations, and also the devel- outworking of the spirit, and it manifests in one’s 
opment of virtues such as discipline, dedication, striving to develop and find meaning and pur- 
and resilience, among others. pose in life. Physical activity can play a major role 

in promoting spiritual experiences (Kretchmar, 
The Value of Humanizing Oneself 2005). Many people, including athletes committed 
Philosopher Doug Anderson (2001) argues that to excellence, report the transformational power 
one becomes fully human when creativity is exer- of cultivating physical activity and embodying an 
cised because it calls “our full range of powers and active lifestyle. One example was philosopher and 
energies to life” (p. 145). For Anderson, physical archer Eugen Herrigel (1953), who developed and 
activity and an active lifestyle can be humanizing discovered meaning in his rich, albeit not always 
because, by involving risk and spontaneity within easy, athletic journey. Clearly, such journeys are 
constraints, they awaken and challenge one’s actual pregnant with possibilities for spiritual revelation 
possibilities and invite creative responses. That is, and, consequently, transformation and meaning. 
unlike ordinary and uninspired action, physical For example, the intricacies of the lives of athletes 
activity and an active lifestyle, along with a com- and dancers, with their ups and downs, work a 
mitment to improving one’s athletic performance, transformation that can generate fuller meaning. 
call for novel and creative action. This kind of 
actualization of one’s humanity is open to all who The Value of Living Well and Loving One’s Life 
are willing to face, day in and day out, the array Many thinkers agree that good living involves caring 
of challenges associated with becoming and being for and being deeply involved in the endeavors one 
athletes in the broadest sense possible. All this undertakes in life. This passionate engagement is 
represents a “source of self-realization” (p. 144) the rule rather than the exception of good living. 
and an “opportunity to become complete human Sport and physical activity are especially apt to 
beings in the face of the ambiguity of our existence” promote this kind of engagement because of their 
(Fairchild, 1987, p. 30). Those who become, for distinctive artificiality. Athletes display profound care 
instance, totally absorbed by their taxing swims, for and vigorous investment in goals that have little 
turns at bat, or yoga routines know that these or no instrumental value but are worthy in and of 
endeavors demand their utmost attention and themselves and should be cultivated for what they 
constitute powerful reasons for being. are. This kind of engagement in sport represents 

not only good living but also love, which could be 
The Value of Experiencing Deep Satisfaction described as being intensely interested in something 
There are different types of the intrinsic good of (or someone) for its (or his or her) own sake. In 

pleasantness. They range from superficial to more this sense, loving physical activity, an active lifestyle, 
extended pleasures. All are available through phys- and a commitment to improving one’s athletic per- 

ical activity and an active lifestyle as well as the formance consists of responding with disinterested 

commitment to improve one’s athletic performance. concern, care, and engagement to its value. A loving 

However, while all are worthy, more extended relationship with physical activity amounts to loving 

pleasures are more significant than superficial an important aspect of one’s life. 



Introduction to Kinesiology 

What Ethical Obligations be right for us to prohibit rule bending or inten- 

tional harm if we exempted ourselves from these 
Do Sportspeople Have? restrictions. In short, societal understandings about 
Sport headlines often tell of cheating, illegal per- right and wrong and the force of self-interest do 
formance enhancers, gamespersonship, and various not provide solid foundations for ethics. 
forms of corruption. It is tempting to think that In sport, decisions about right and wrong actions 
such behaviors affect mainly professional sport, require that we keep in mind our conceptual anal- 
but they often appear in intercollegiate sport as ysis of competition. The more we understand the 
well. Even organized youth sport and recreational characteristics of competitive sport, the clearer 
sport can be affected by various forms of dishonest and stronger our deliberations will be about what 
and troublesome conduct. This state of affairs has actions—by athletes, coaches, and administra- 
been attributed to multiple and complex causes, tors—promote its flourishing. These deliberations 
including, among others, an overemphasis on win- provide principles about how these folks ought 
ning, the transformation of sport into a commodity, to behave. Sometimes ethical considerations in 
the rise of individualism, and strategic reasoning. sport also include spectators, parents of young 
Whatever the causes, it is clear that many athletes, athletes, and other people related to sport. The 
coaches, administrators, parents, and spectators are goal is to produce the best possible world of sport 
tempted to overlook the morality of their actions. for everyone. 
This highlights the ways in which sport participa- When we consider competitive sport as a recip- 
tion tests and invites us to exercise our capacities rocal challenge in the pursuit of excellence—and 
for moral reasoning. If the moral status of sport is when we use the moral guideline of creating the 
to be improved, then we need to engage seriously greatest good for the most people—we can gener- 
in this kind of reasoning. ate the following behavioral guidelines: 

As we have noted, ethics involves determining 
¢ Follow the rules of the sport not simply 

what is right, what is wrong, and what ought or 
because they are the rules but because they 

ought not to be done. To put it another way, ethics 
is concerned with questions about how we should serve as the foundation for the artificial 

live our lives; in sport, this involves formulating problem that you regard as special. Avoid 

defensible standards of behavior. While thinking cheating, which alters, and even destroys, the 

ethically, you must make an effort to be impartial, sport and vitiates the legitimacy of results. 

consistent, and critical. Our thinking can be biased ¢ Respect your opponent as someone who not 
by our emotions, our assumptions, and our human only facilitates the contest but also makes 
tendency to give ourselves a break. The moral point possible the creation of athletic excellence. 
of view is universal, one in which you do not count View your Opponent as a partner who 
more than anyone else. Using this point of view, it is belongs to the same community of contes- 
difficult to justify bending the rules simply because tants and shares your interests and passions. 
“everyone does it” or intentionally injuring the best ° Strive to bring out the best performance in 
opposing player in a soccer match in order to send one another. This approach honors each per- 
her to the sidelines for the rest of the game. In the son’s motor skills and the sport’s standards 
context of universality, we would not want to be of excellence. 
the recipient of such actions, and, because no one 

* Recognize and celebrate athletic excellence— 
is more important than anyone else, it would not 

your own as well as that of your opponent. 

Winning Strategies 

Using principles of universality, what kinds of strategies do you believe should be acceptable 
in sport? What about flopping in soccer to draw a foul call, intentionally fouling an opponent in 
basketball to stop the clock, or intimidating a batter by intentionally throwing a pitch toward his or 
her head? What principles can you develop to distinguish between acceptable and unacceptable 
Sporting actions? What ideas can you generate to discourage the use of morally unacceptable 
strategies? For example, should we levy harsher penalties? Use incentives? Provide more educa- 
tion? Do something else? 



Chapter 3] Philosophy of Physical Activity 

* Seek opponents who are close to you in Some scholars have disagreed. Their arguments 
ability and who compete with personal have run in two directions. In one direction, critics 
resolve to win without slacking off during suggest that partisanship blinds us to the deeper 
the contest. and more important values in sport spectating. In 

* Care about your opponent's well-being as the other direction, they argue that partisanship 
much as your own. Your opponent is inte- itself embodies indefensible attitudes and leads to 
gral to the contest, and a victory is fully unethical behaviors (see Tannsj6, 1998, for a strong 

meaningful when your opponent is at his criticism of fan behavior). Those who adopt the 
or her best. former position are called purists (see Dixon, 2001, 

for an overview of their position). Purists favor 
* Remember that how you play says as much 

aesthetic and objective perspectives over partisan 
about you as an athlete as the scoreboard 
does. interests when watching a game. Here are some of 

their arguments for your consideration: 
The first scenario presented at the beginning 

* Sport is about the achievement of excel- 
of the chapter poses a moral dilemma related to 

lence. Fans should celebrate excellence, 
professional sport. What should you recommend to 

applaud excellent play, and honor great 
the executive staff of the basketball team you work 

sporting feats, no matter who produces 
for regarding its belief that failing to compete, or 

them. In short, you should value excellence 
“tanking,” could be a key strategy for rebuilding the 

over mere victories. 
team? This issue relates to the duties of those who 
are in charge of deciding the longer-term goals of ¢ The game is a drama. The best dramas 

the team and the means of accomplishing them. include a rise of tensions, a climax, and 

Such duties are related to the viability of the team an exciting conclusion. Thus, you should 

as a commercial enterprise but also, and perhaps value spellbinding dramas, close games, and 

primarily, to the nature of competitive sport and last-minute reversals over blowout victories, 

its values. no matter who wins. 

¢ Sporting opponents are partners, not ene- 

Ethics and Sport Partisanship mies. The game itself could not take place 
without the opponents. Moreover, and more 

Most of us are partisans in some parts of our lives. importantly, excellent opponents stimulate 
We find it difficult to remain absolutely neutral, excellent responses from one’s own team. 
detached, dispassionate, objective, and even- Therefore, you should appreciate, honor, 
handed, particularly in competitive situations. We and applaud tough opponents. Victories and 
side with one group or another—one religious defeats are not binary outcomes. A victory 
tradition, one country, one political party, one may be earned to varying degrees, or it may 
ethnic group, or one sport team over others. We not be deserved at all. On the other hand, 
care who comes out on top and who loses, whether a defeat may or may not result from poor 
it be a national election or a Saturday afternoon play. Thus, you should appreciate a defeat 
football game. In collegiate sport settings, we root in a well-played game over a victory in a 
for “our” school, “our” team, “our” men and women. poorly played contest—for instance, in a 
Such partisan commitments make sport spectating game in which little skill was shown or the 
more personal. For most, they also make it more victory was due to such factors as pure luck 
interesting, more exciting, and more fun. or officiating errors. 

Many sport fans are moderate partisans. They 
are moderate because they do not allow their In sum, those who would adopt this more objec- 

allegiance to get out of control. They root hard for tive and aesthetic attitude toward games emphasize 

their favorite team, but they also enjoy the game the values of sporting excellence, dramatic beauty, 

itself. They feel elated when their side wins and competitive collaboration, and high-quality play. 

disappointed when they lose, but they do not let Partisanship, they say, can blind you to those 

their euphoria or disappointment lead to reckless values. 

behavior. Given the amount of pleasure that big- Those who criticize partisanship from the other 

game weekends can provide, one could easily direction argue that partisan attitudes are inher- 

conclude that partisanship—particularly moderate ently indefensible, and partisan-fueled behaviors 

partisanship—is a good thing. In other words, it is are often harmful. Here are some of their arguments 

ethically defensible (Dixon, 2001; Mumford, 2012). for your consideration: 



eZ Introduction to Kinesiology 

¢ Partisanship is retrograde. It is a form of the start of this section, partisanship can enhance 

tribalism, probably a holdover from our the enjoyment or fun of watching games. 

evolutionary past. Partisanship separates Whatever position you end up taking, you 

rather than unites, emphasizes differences should be struck by the fact that even an issue 

over commonalities, and makes it easier like being a sports fan can generate complex and 

to demonize and dehumanize opponents. complicated arguments over how we ought to live. 

Thus, you should resist and not give in to Even if sport fandom is not one of the most signif- 

divisive tribal tendencies. icant issues we face as human beings, it is still one 
that touches on our humanity in significant ways. It 

¢ Partisanship celebrates inferior values. It 
honors stratifications of individuals and spills over into our politics, our national identities, 

groups, rankings that place “us” over “them.” and many other places in our lives where we are 

It emphasizes zero-sum relationships where inclined and encouraged to take sides. 

the most glorious victories for one side 
produce the most painful losses for the What New Ethical Concerns Have 
other. Consequently, you should emphasize Appeared on the Horizon? 
positive values and promote win-win, not 
zero-sum, relationships. Ethical issues do not stand still. As the social, 

cultural, and technological landscapes change, 
¢ Partisanship is dangerous. It leads to win- 

new ethical questions arise. One hundred years 
at-all-cost attitudes. It incentivizes cheating, 

ago, nobody was concerned about the ethics of 
intimidating game officials, booing oppo- 

social media, the ethics of organ transplants or 
nents, and overlooking or excusing scandals 

genetic testing, the ethics that should govern the 
perpetrated by one’s own team. Therefore, 

use of drones in attacking military targets, or the 
you should avoid attitudes that generate 

ethics of massive greenhouse gas emissions and 
such unethical behaviors. 

global warming. The same evolutions occur in the 
e Partisanship causes harm. It has produced domains of health, sport, and physical activity. 

hooliganism, fights between fans, and New ethical questions have emerged with recent 
threats to life and limb and property. You social, cultural, and technological changes. Some 
should avoid attitudes that lead to such examples are given in the following list. 
unethical outcomes. 

¢ Should technology be used to improve the 
These critics, in sum, question the very foun- fairness of games by eliminating or reducing 

dations of partisanship—the focus on separating, errors made by umpires or other officials? 
comparing, ranking, celebrating superiority, and For example, should all balls and strikes 
exposing inferiority. They underline the harms in baseball be determined electronically? 
and risks associated with being too partisan, with Should more plays in football, basketball, 
caring too much for victories by one’s own team, and soccer be subject to video reviews, even 
for blindly idolizing a player on one’s own team and if doing so lengthens games and interrupts 
dehumanizing opponents and all so-called losers. the accepted rhythm of play? 

Where do you stand on the ethics of sport par- 
¢ Should sporting competitions continue 

tisanship? Given the arguments of critics, many 
to be divided on the basis of binary sex 

would favor some kind of middle position—one 
identifications? Competitive sport has been 

that emphasizes the values of being an avid fan but 
historically hostile to athletes who do not 

minimizes the blind spots partisanship creates as 
conform to the strict sex binarism that has 

well as the harms it can produce. 
long characterized it. This has made par- 

This position gains strength in light of sev- 
ticipation in competitive sport difficult for 

eral positive values that accompany partisan 
transgender athletes. However, exclusion- 

approaches to sport. Four of them are love, com- 
mitment, loyalty, and courage. Good sports fans ary policies have been slowly giving way 

care deeply about their team. They are not fickle. to more inclusionary ones for transgender 

They do not abandon their team when it falls on athletes. What should the inclusionary pol- 
icies look like? 

hard times. They have the courage to love and to 
care, knowing that such commitments carry some * Should safer, high-tech equipment be 
risk. Being committed to a particular team can, for required in sport to reduce the risk of injury? 
instance, lead to heartbreak. And as mentioned at What if such equipment is unduly expensive 



Chapter 3| Philosophy of Physical Activity eS Sai 

Ethics and Transgender Competitors 

Ethical reflection in sport typically requires that we critically examine societal understandings about 
right and wrong as well as tendencies that favor self-interest. When evaluating the best course 
of action in a given situation, we must also consider what is good for sport and for the interests 
of everyone involved. One of the current concerns in competitive sport is the possibility that, 
because of the supposedly unfair advantage conferred by their physiology, transgender females 
might disrupt the condition of equality among athletes. However, several scholars have argued 
that transgender athletes have no such advantage and consequently do not disrupt competitive 
fairness (Jordan-Young & Karkazis, 2019; Teetzel, 2006; Wahlert & Fiester, 2012). Thus, according 
to these scholars, there is no compelling reason to exclude transgender athletes from competition 
or force them to compete under the sex assigned to them at birth. 

Another argument in favor of including transgender athletes in competition against members 
of their selfidentified gender does not hinge on physiological equivalency but on the relevance of 
gender in people's lives and identities. Sport participation can be a powerful way for athletes to 
write a meaningful gendered narrative (Gleaves & Lehrbach, 2016). Transgender athletes have 
the same right as any other athlete to write such narratives, and they should be able to select the 
category in which they wish to compete. This view suggests that transgender athletes’ inclusion in 
sport should not be conditioned solely on hormone therapy, surgery, or any other intervention meant 
to conform them to the strict sex binarism prevailing in competitive sport. In short, self-identified 
gender identity should be enough for inclusion in sport because it implies sensitive and respectful 
treatment of all athletes. Given these arguments, and considering the prejudice and discrimination 
faced by transgender athletes, you now may be in a better position to analyze this complex issue 
that requires going beyond physiological criteria. 

and prevents all but the wealthy from partic- should athletes be required to be fitted 
ipating? Should a high-tech football helmet with such microchips to keep sport clean 
be mandated even if it means that fewer and protect athletes who abide by doping 
schools can afford the sport and therefore regulations? 
fewer athletes get to play? Should electronically enhanced feedback 
Even if safer equipment is developed and be allowed to help athletes make decisions 
affordable, should young athletes be per- in the heat of competition? Should bikers, 
mitted to participate in dangerous sports for instance, be allowed to wear measuring 
such as football or boxing? How should devices that provide information about heart 
young athletes’ wishes to participate in rate, energy expenditure, and other physio- 
such sports be treated? Similarly, should the logical indicators? 
predisposition and talents of young athletes Should athletes be permitted to use new med- 
for dangerous sport be encouraged? ical procedures to enhance their natural abili- 
Should newly developed high-performance ties? For instance, should athletes who already 
equipment be allowed? For instance, should enjoy 20/20 vision be allowed to have LASIK 
new swimsuits be permitted? Should “hot” eye surgery to give them even better visual 
golf balls be legal? What does new equip- acuity? Should elective muscle or joint surgery 
ment do to our ability to compare the be permitted in order to enhance strength 
performances of those who played many or flexibility? Should athletes be allowed to 
years ago (with inferior equipment) and undergo amputations and substitute high-tech 
those who play now (with more advanced “blades” for their own legs? 

equipment)? How do we determine which Should genetic engineering be allowed to 
players rank among the best? enhance athletic performance? Would it be 

If reliable and convenient microchips with right for parents to engineer the profile of 

the ability to detect illegal performance-en- their future offspring, a potential super-ath- 

hancing substances become available, lete, from a genetic menu? 



me 74 Introduction to Kinesiology 

When Overload Becomes Overemphasis or Overspecialization 

The pitfall of going too far in the quest for athletic excellence is not limited to futuristic genetic 

therapies. To the contrary, some athletes today suffer from injury or burnout related to overuse, 

excessive training at an early age, overspecialization, or extreme parental or social pressure. On 

one hand, such commitment may seem to be required by one’s pursuit of excellence, hope for 

a college scholarship, or desire to keep up with friends. It is hard to argue against the quest for 
excellence and a good work ethic. On the other hand, the trade-offs may be too severe in physical, 
emotional, or social terms. Some ethicists have argued that such extreme measures distort the 
person and lead ultimately to a less satisfying life. Children, they say, have a right to enjoy sport 
and experience it as play. 

af NA lal | ee ee ee it means to move and do so skillfully. Philosophers 
use reflective techniques to answer questions that 

Ethical reflection in sport requires a critical examination 
cannot be fully addressed through testing, mea- 

of societal understandings about right and wrong, ten- 
surement, or other experimental methodologies. 

dencies that favor self-interest, and conceptualization 
Philosophy is particularly important at a time when 

of what is good for sport and everybody involved in it. many ethical questions need answers and when the 
values of physical activity are contested. Philosophy 
is practical because the answers it produces help 

Wrap-Up shape our professional practice. No kinesiologist 

Philosophy offers not just a body of knowledge can avoid establishing priorities or making value 

but, more important, an intriguing way of think- judgments and ethical decisions. Because these 

ing about reality. More specifically, philosophy things cannot be avoided, they should be done well 

of physical activity helps us reach new insights on the basis of thoughtful examination. 

about various forms of physical activity and what 

_MORE INFORMATION ON PHILOSOPHY OF PHYSICAL ACTIVITY 

Organizations 

British Philosophy of Sport Association 

European Association for the Philosophy of Sport 

International Association for the Philosophy of Sport 

Asociacion Latina de Filosofia del Deporte 

Journals 

International Journal of Religion and Sport 

Journal of the Philosophy of Sport 

FairPlay. Journal of Philosophy, Ethics and Sports Law 

Quest 

Sport, Ethics and Philosophy 



Chapter 3| Philosophy of Physical Activity Dp Zz 

Introductory and Reference Texts 

Kretchmar, R.S. (2005). Practical philosophy of sport and physical activity (2nd ed.). Human 
Kinetics. 

Kretchmar, R.S. (Ed.). (2017). Philosophy: Sport. MacMillan. 
Kretchmar, R.S., Dyreson, M., Llewellyn, M., & Gleaves, J. (2017). History and philosophy of 
sport and physical activity. Human Kinetics. 

Kretchmar, R.S., & Hopsicker, P.M. (Eds.). (2015). Philosophy of sport: Critical concepts in 
sport studies, Routledge. 

McNamee, M., & Morgan, WJ. (Eds.). (2015). Routledge handbook of the philosophy of sport. 
Routledge. 

Reid, H. (2012). Introduction to the philosophy of sport. Rowman & Littlefield. 

Ryall, E. (2016). Philosophy of sport: Key questions. Bloomsbury. 

Torres, C.R. (Ed.). (2014). The Bloomsbury companion to the philosophy of sport. Bloomsbury. 

WANTS A 2 eS eo ee ee ee cee 
1. Describe the main goal of the philosophical study of physical activity, as well as the four 

major kinds of issues it most commonly tackles. 

2. Describe the three reasoning processes that serve as central research tools in philosophical 
studies of physical activity. 

3. Describe the main challenges that the philosophy of physical activity faced in its beginnings 
and the changes in the last three decades that favored its development. 

4. Discuss the concept of blended unity of mind and body, as well as its implications for school 
physical activity programs, research on physical activity, and the well-being of competitive 
athletes. How does this concept constitute an improvement over dualistic views of mind 
apart from body and over materialistic views that picture persons as complex machines? 

5. Explain the relationship between rules and skills in sport. Why is this relationship relevant 
to competition? 

6. Discuss duty-like play, sport, and physical activity and how people relate to and experience 
these types of activity. 

7. Describe the value of physical activity, an active lifestyle, and athletic excellence. How does 
such value relate to good living? 

8. How can we decide what kinds of performance enhancement are morally defensible? 

9. Are ethical standards unchanging? If not, are they influenced by social, cultural, and tech- 
nological factors? Are they influenced by reason or insight? 

Fa faa 
CS i KPrope |» ) Go to HKPropel to complete the activities for this chapter. 



\\ 

ade ” ; 
. = 

a ere a ‘) 

2 pes i 
a ed 7 A 

Wee 6 re .& 

o4#8*t 2G 
a 3 

tome 

7 wes 

V0 wasn 

bee the Gp stbed. 

ay we ie olen 

be) Peele onl Cel te 
~ 

| f 



History of Physical Activity 
Lindsay Parks Pieper 

In this chapter, we will ee 

e explain what a physical activity historian does, 

e describe the goals of history of physical activity, 2 

e describe how the subdiscipline of history ofp hysicala ctivity developed, | : 

e explain how research is conducted in historyo f physicala ctivity, and 

e explain what research tells us about physical ctivityi n US..  societyf rom c 

the Industrial Reeve tot hee e . 



A SUIVEY course in U.S. history will tell you about some rather strict rulesi nt he Puritan society 
of 17th-century New England. Puritans limited the use of time away from work, prohibited recre- 

ational practices on the Sabbath, and banned certain forms of play and amusement altogether.—  

Many of these rules were made into laws in most of the U.S. states following the Revolutionary 

War and were still in effect in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. In contrast, by the 1870s and 

1880s, churches, YMCAs, and YWCAs sponsored sport competitions and even built gymnasiums 

and playfields. You can find photographs of such facilities, both in books and online, that show 

children and young men and women participating, for example, in exercise classes and playing 

baseball on a lot next to a church. In 1891, in just such a setting—the International YMCA Training 

Institute in Springfield, Massachusetts—a young instructor developed the rules for the first game 
of basketball. By the 1920s, some religious publishing companies were producing folk and square 
dance records for use in church youth recreational programs. 

What happened to change sport-related beliefs and practices so rapidly over a 50- to 60-year 
period? What societal influences played a role in changing religious behaviors so profoundly? What 

GnaWSRindatimeSahdeard ra gsa  l 
biblical understandings and interpretations had to be modified to allow such an alteration in practice 
and teaching? Did theological differences arise 
over this issue within : 
and between religious 
denominations and — 
congregations? Was 
this evolution led byf ig- 
ures in various denom- 

iERVMeWA pyLEehTI e N  
_inations, or did secular 
culture influence the 
_ behaviors of otherwise — 
_ devout church mem-. 
bers? Was the change 
_ positive or negative for 

the church? For society? 

Courtesy of the Librar of Cong 

The developments presented here describe one the larger society, as well as how it has influenced 
aspect of the historical relationship between two other areas of communal life on the national and 
cultural institutions found in most, if not all, soci- world levels. You will also begin to appreciate the 
eties in the world: (1) organized play, sport, and exciting array of opportunities that exist for those 
exercise, which in this text we place under the who choose to become physical activity historians, 
umbrella term physical activity, and (2) religion. as well as the many ways in which knowledge of 
Historians also examine relationships between our professional history can be used by kinesiol- 
physical activity and other social institutions, ogists in other subdisciplines. 
including, among others, those in the realms of eco- 
nomics, politics, business, and education. The same 
is true of music and art historians, labor historians, Why Use History of Physical Activity? 
medical historians, and military historians. This is Consider what life would be like if you didn’t have 
the case because the history of humankind is too a memory. You wouldn’t be able to recall the 10 
complex to be understood through only one lens. years that you spent training with a swim team, 

In this chapter, you will begin to see many ways the pickup basketball games you played at your 
in which physical activity has been acted on by local neighborhood courts, the time you broke your 

m/s 



Chapter 4 |H istory of Physical Activity 

Goals of History of Physical Activity 

» To identify and describe patterns of change and stability in physical activity in particular 
societies or cultures during specific periods 

> To analyze such patterns to explain why certain things occurred 

leg falling off your bike and went to an exercise porated into the missions of many congregations 
rehabilitation program for several months, or the and approved by many clergy members, physical 
fortunes of your favorite team. Memories give you education was increasingly accepted in private and 
insights about how things came to be the way public schools. Parks and recreation departments 
they are. No one possesses perfect memory, and likewise developed in cities across the United States 
no one can predict the future with total accuracy, in the early 20th century. Today, many universities 
but our recollections can help us act intelligently pursue fame and recognition through investments 
by avoiding errors from the past and developing in intercollegiate athletics. 
reasonable plans for the future. Although historians of physical activity are aca- 

History offers both broad and detailed insights demic specialists in their own right, with specific 
that go far beyond our own memory; thus, it gives goals that help guide their research, the fruit of 
us the opportunity to develop a more extensive their labor is often applied in a variety of other pro- 
memory than we could ever acquire independently. fessional roles. For instance, many of the modern 
History consists of a vast collection of information, exercise machines found in college recreation 
mostly about events that occurred before we were centers, athletic training facilities, and commercial 
born and often in geographic regions and societies fitness centers are based on models developed by 
different from our own. For instance, the ancient an early U.S. physical education leader, Dudley 
Olympic Games in Greece, 18th-century peasant Allen Sargent, who directed the Hemenway Gym- 
ball games in Europe, and 20th-century basketball nasium at Harvard University in the late 19th and 
in the United States have all influenced the physical early 20th centuries. Later, exercise specialists and 
activities that we take part in today. Studying his- engineers adapted Sargent’s ideas and principles 
tory gives us windows into the past and magnifying to contemporary knowledge and construction 
lenses with which to look closely at things that we materials that were unavailable in his own time. 
find especially compelling. It helps us understand In turn, some of Sargent’s ideas were based on 
how and why our current physical activities are principles developed by even earlier inventors of 
structured the way they are, allows us to compare whom he undoubtedly learned through the work of 
them with physical activities from earlier periods, historians. In a similar fashion, coaches often create 

and gives us the tools to look toward the future new playing strategies and training techniques by 

from new vantage points. adapting those of earlier generations of coaches 
For instance, a kinesiologist who is knowledge- whose work they have studied. 

able about the history of physical activity would Knowing the history of sport, games, and exer- 

probably interpret an issue such as a fitness trend— cise gives creative physical education teachers a 

or the popularity of spectator sports in colleges and tool for building interest in their lessons by helping 

universities, or the availability of opportunity in students discover the development and evolution 

sport across racial, class, and gender lines—quite of an activity. In yet another application, scholars 

differently from someone who lacks such knowl- and scientists who perform research in any of the 

edge. Similarly, a person who has studied history of other kinesiology subdisciplines described in this 

physical activity could look at the chapter-opening book also rely on the work of earlier researchers in 

scenario and offer answers to the questions posed. their own fields. They can learn about this history 

For example, such a person would know that Prot- thanks to physical activity historians who have 

estant Christianity in the United States underwent analyzed past work and summarized it in historical 

a gradual but radical change in attitude toward context. For example, one might examine how the 

recreational physical activity—a development first generation of scholars in a given field resolved 

known as Muscular Christianity—in the latter half ethical considerations related to the use of human 

of the 19th century. In the ensuing years, as orga- or animal subjects and whether those issues have 

nized sport and exercise were increasingly incor- changed as the field has matured. Understanding 



al 80 Introduction to Kinesiology 

past practices can help us avoid earlier mistakes, Kinesiologists do know that interest in exercise 

make adaptations that work within a new scheme, picked up in the United States in the 1950s due to 

and gain insights that sometimes lead to entirely a variety of influences, including Cold War fears, 

new ways of thinking about a specific problem. President Dwight D. Eisenhower’s heart attack, and 

Knowledge of history also helps us make better evidence suggesting that U.S. children were less 

decisions today—for example, the decision by sport physically fit than their European counterparts. 

organizations to ban players, coaches, and man- Kinesiologists also know about an earlier period 

agers from contact with gamblers. Major League in U.S. history when exercise was prominent—the 
Baseball was the first to adopt such a policy, doing late 19th century (Park, 1987a). 
so in the wake of the 1919 World Series, in which We can also point out that U.S. fascination with 

players from the heavily favored Chicago White structured exercise has fluctuated over the years, 
Sox were accused of accepting money from gam- focusing on different benefits of physical activity. 
blers in exchange for purposely losing the series This knowledge raises important questions: Is the 
to the Cincinnati Reds. Public outrage threatened current, relatively high level of interest in exer- 
to reduce confidence in the integrity of the game, cise for health likely to decrease (as is perhaps 
which of course could have cut into ticket sales. suggested by the historical fluctuation)? If so, the 
With that lesson in mind, similar policies were coming decrease carries serious negative implica- 
adopted by other sport organizations, such as the tions for the health of many Americans given the 
National Football League, the National Basketball decline that would result in physical fitness for 
Association, the National Hockey League, the most of the U.S. population. Can we do anything 
National Collegiate Athletic Association, and the to prevent this possible downward cycle? Or do 
U.S. Olympic Committee. Thus, the memory of the we now have such strong scientific evidence con- 
1919 scandal has informed decisions by various firming the health benefits of exercise that we 
organizations to fine, suspend, and dismiss players will break the roller-coaster pattern of the past? 
and management personnel for associating with We could not even raise these questions without 
gamblers in any manner. The work of sport histo- understanding the history of physical activity. 
rians will remain important as journalists and sport Your own previous physical activity experiences, 
governing bodies deal with the increasing interest academic studies, and even observations of profes- 
in sports gambling. sional practice have given you some insight into 

It is hard to miss the phenomenon of U.S. soci- the recent history of physical activity. For example, 
ety’s current interest in exercise, health, and fitness. experience in competitive team sports may have 
Exercise studios and health clubs dot the landscape, given you firsthand knowledge of the fact that 
and these topics are widely addressed in videos, basketball, volleyball, and soccer are incredibly 
blogs, websites, books, and magazines. However, popular in Western societies and, in recent years, 
if you asked teenagers or people in their 20s about have grown tremendously in Asian and African 
the origins of this trend, most would probably draw countries. If you have ever wondered how this 
a blank. Moreover, at the same time that much of came to be, then you have been on the verge of 
U.S. society seems absorbed in the idea and the historical inquiry. Or perhaps you have noticed 
practice of exercise, health, and fitness, the nation gender inequities in physical activity and wondered 
also faces rising obesity rates in the youngest of what historical events led to their existence. If you 
children and in the adult population. The origins are a man, then perhaps at some point you have 
of this perplexing issue, as well as the current feared being teased for a lack of athletic ability. If 
conditions contributing to it, are still being sought you are a male athlete, then you may have noticed 
out by medical professionals and kinesiologists, with some unease how much more financial sup- 
including some historians. port you received to develop your athletic talents 

than your female counterparts did. If you are a 
woman, then you may have felt strangely out of 

PSK EVSP ON Yet ee com, corse ree ee place in a competitive environment or noticed the 
History of physical activity teaches us about changes disproportionate limitations on the financial sup- 
as well as stability in the past. This knowledge helps us port available to help you improve your athletic 
understand the present and make informed decisions skills. Whatever your particular case, if you have 
for the future. ever wondered why such situations exist, then once 

again you were on the verge of delving into history. 



Chapter 4 |H istory of Physical Activity 31 

More formally, your previous scholarly study who work as athletic trainers, sport marketers, 
has probably familiarized you with some histori- personal trainers, or sport physical therapists. 
cal information that will help you understand the These professionals are part of an important his- 
history of physical activity. Much of the historical torical trend. Not long ago, career opportunities for 
research on physical activity has a Eurocentric per- people in the physical activity field were limited 
spective deriving from ancient Greece and Rome, to professorships, physical education teacher posi- 
and, more recently, Western Europe and North tions, and coaching jobs. In recent years, however, 
America. Knowing something about the history of professional opportunities have expanded greatly, 
these societies will make the history of physical particularly in the private and not-for-profit sectors. 
activity easier for you to learn and remember, For This, too, is a historical phenomenon. 
example, if you know that nationalism and national 

patriotism swept through Europe in the 19th cen- 
tury, then you will not be surprised to learn that What Do Historians 
in countries such as Germany and Sweden people of Physical Activity Do? 
sought to use special gymnastics systems to build 
a healthy citizenry that would keep their nations As outlined at the beginning of the chapter, phys- 

strong. In turn, making this connection helps you ical activity historians pursue two main goals. The 

remember when, and at least one reason why, first goal is to identify and describe patterns of 

such gymnastics systems came into being. We also change and stability in physical activity in particular 

have much to learn about the rich physical activity societies or cultures during specific periods. The 

histories of African, Asian, Middle Eastern, Native second goal is to analyze such patterns to explain 

American, and other cultures. why certain things occurred. In terms of the first 

Finally, from watching physical activity profes- goal, historians provide enormous factual detail 

sionals in action, you may have observed some to give readers a robust description of a particular 

history in the making. Perhaps you know people phenomenon. For example, historians describe 

Comparing Sport: Then and Now 

Many movies show people playing sports during different historical periods. Here are just a few 
examples: 

42 (set during mid-1940s; racial integration of professional baseball) 

A League of Their Own (set during 1943; women’s professional baseball) 

Battle of the Sexes (set during 1970s; tennis) 

Breaking Away (set during late 1970s; bicycling) 

Chariots of Fire (set in 1924; Olympic track and field) 

Cinderella Man (set during 1930s; boxing) 

Field of Dreams (set during 1980s with references to 1919; baseball) 

Glory Road (set in 1966; college basketball) 

Hoosiers (set during 1950s; high school basketball) 

Kansas City Bomber (set during 1970s; roller derby) 

Leatherheads (set in 1925; American football) 

Moneyball (set in 2002; professional baseball) 

Race (set in 1936; Olympic track and field) 

Remember the Titans (set in 1971 during desegregation of high school football) 

Seabiscuit (set during 1930s; horse racing) 

There are many others. Think about film footage that you have seen of people playing a sport 

during different historical time periods. Compare it with how the sport is played today or how 

contemporary sport is presented in movies. 



a 82 Introduction to Kinesiology 

what it was like to be involved in a specific phys- cise programs in schools and universities, joining 

ical activity as well as the values and attitudes community-based sport clubs, riding bicycles, and 

that people had toward the activity, the people’s conferring hero status on top athletes. Understand- 

broader living patterns, the general societal values ing how this earlier generation of Bostonians used 
and attitudes prevalent at the time, how people’s physical activity to benefit the entire city could well 
physical activities fit into their everyday lives, and prompt modern-day community leaders to work 

how their physical activities changed. with physical educators, recreation specialists, 

Sometimes changes occur slowly, giving us the exercise consultants, landscape architects, land 

impression that things have stayed the same. For developers, and urban planners to create new and 
example, the rules, strategies, styles of play, and exciting opportunities for current and future gen- 
equipment in many of our sports changed consid- erations of citizens. 
erably during the 20th century; however, because Historians who study physical activity are usu- 
these shifts occurred relatively slowly, the games ally college or university faculty members, but they 
remained recognizable. At other times, changes also include librarians, journalists, consultants for 
take place much more rapidly and dramatically. book publishing companies, archivists in charge 
For example, improvements in bicycle design in the of special collections of documents, and museum 
United States more than 100 years ago contributed curators. We focus here on faculty members, whose 
to a rapid rise in bicycling and enabled the bicycle typical activities include teaching, research, and 
craze of the 1890s (Hardy, 1982). professional service. They often teach broad survey 

The second main goal pursued by physical courses on history of physical activity, and some of 
activity historians is to analyze the patterns of their classes focus more narrowly on topics such 
change and stability that they find in physical as the ancient Olympic Games, physical activity in 
activity in particular societies or cultures during times of disease, and sport and race relations in 
specific periods. That is, most historians go beyond the United States. Examples of professional service 
description in order to demonstrate relationships include giving a community presentation about the 
and influences and thereby explain why certain history of a region’s minor league baseball team, 
things occurred. To do so, they look for individuals, participating in an educational television panel to 
groups, events, and ideas that helped bring about discuss the history of gender relations in Ameri- 
changes or maintain stability. For example, Hardy’s can sport, and helping a city’s nonprofit historical 
(1982) book How Boston Played: Sport, Recre- society put together a museum display about the 
ation, and Community 1865-1915 focuses on the history of rehabilitative exercise. 
city-building process that took place in Boston after 
the Civil War. During that time, the population of 
the city mushroomed as European immigrants and 2eKEY POIND e= e 
people from the countryside arrived to take jobs Most physical activity historians are college and univer- 
created by the Industrial Revolution. The growth sity faculty members. They pursue the two main goals 
in population led to major problems, such as over- 

of the subdiscipline—identifying and describing key 
crowded tenements, poor health, neighborhood 

patterns and analyzing those patterns—through their 
destruction, crime, ethnic conflict, and political 

research, teaching, and service. 
and moral disorder—all of which threatened tradi- 
tional ways of life. Hardy believed that Bostonians 
were looking for ways to revitalize their sense of Libraries are perhaps the most important 
connectedness to one another and that sport and research tools for historians. For example, if you 
recreation played an important part in that process. want to study the physical activities of African 

Looking at what happened in Boston during Americans during slavery, you could use a library 
this period, Hardy outlines three ways Bostonians to locate sources. These might include interviews 
responded to the problems in their city: escape with former slaves, published accounts from White 
from the city and its problems, reform of the city slaveholders written during the time of slavery, and 
and its problems, and accommodation to new accounts from Northern Whites who visited South- 
forms of city life by developing a renewed sense ern plantations (Wiggins, 1980). Because libraries 
of group identity (1982, pp. 197-201). Hardy used are so important, most historians take great care to 
these categories to examine the complex ways in develop solid working relationships with librarians. 
which people sought community by building new Librarians are crucial in maintaining and providing 
playgrounds and parks, expanding sport and exer- access to rare and valuable materials. 



Chapter 4 |H istory of Physical Activity 83 

Historians of physical activity sometimes apply until the 1960s that the subdiscipline began to 
for research money, either from their own institu- develop a recognizable identity in North American 
tion or from outside organizations that specialize kinesiology. 
in supporting historical research. Historians often One of the earliest U.S. reports to emphasize 
use such funding to travel to libraries in distant the history of physical activity was Edward Hart- 
cities or to pay research assistants to help collect well’s On Physical Training (1899), which included 
information. When asking for research money, information about ancient Greece, Europe and 
historians must write clear, persuasive proposals. Great Britain, and the United States (Gerber, 1971). 
Funding organizations usually require applicants Hartwell believed that professionals who would 
to describe such things as the topic they want to be charting a course for the future should know 
investigate, why it is important, the sort of informa- about the past, and as early as 1893, he pointed 
tion they will collect, the sources where they will to the need for a textbook on history of physical 
find this information, what makes them competent education. Decades would pass, however, before 
to conduct the study, how much money they need, such texts appeared. 
and what they will purchase with that money. In 1917, historian Frederic Paxson wrote a 

classic article titled “The Rise of Sport” (Paxson, 
1917). Drawing from the well-known frontier thesis 

History of Kinesiology developed by his graduate school mentor Frederick 

and Physical Activity Jackson Turner, Paxson argued that the disappear- 
ance of the Western frontier spurred an increase in 

A handful of U.S. scholars studied history of phys- the popularity of sport because sport served some 
ical activity in the early 20th century, and even in of the same functions of escape or release that the 
the late 19th century at least one physical educator frontier had enabled (Pope, 1997; Struna, 1997). 
viewed the subject as important. Even so, it wasn’t This safety valve function and Paxson’s notion of 

Sport historians look at where we've come from to help us see where we're going. 

Courtesy of the Library of Congress, LC-DIG-hec-23026. 



me 84 Introduction to Kinesiology 

the gradual, inevitable social evolution of sport Association for Men (NCPEAM). Because this was 

served as central ideas in the research of many the only formal organization for sport historians 

sport history scholars for decades to come. at the time, the NCPEAM Proceedings became an 

In the 1920s and 1930s, physical educators important published record of their work (Berry- 

published several textbooks on the history of phys- man, 1973; Struna, 1997). 

ical education, as well as articles in professional Scholars in the discipline of history became 
journals on the development of physical education more interested in studying sport when Eugen 

programs in schools and colleges. These books and Weber, a prominent historian, presented a paper 

articles probably helped lead physical education titled Gymnastics and Sports in Fin-de-Siécle 

departments at colleges and universities to recog- France: Opium of the Classes? at the 1970 meet- 

nize the importance of history of physical activity. ing of the American Historical Association (AHA) 
Seward Staley (1937), professor of physical edu- and published it the following year in American 

cation at the University of Illinois, opened the door Historical Review (Weber, 1970; Berryman, 1973). 
wider when he suggested that courses on the history The program of the 1971 AHA meeting included 
of physical education should include a focus on the an entire section on sport history. 
history of sport. Under his direction, graduate stu- In another development, the North American 
dents began studying sport history at the University Society for Sport History (NASSH) was established 
of Illinois after World War II (Struna, 1997). in 1972, held its first annual conference in May 

In 1940, historian Foster Rhea Dulles published 1973, and was soon recognized as the main schol- 
his widely read America Learns to Play: A History arly association for sport historians in the United 
of Popular Recreation. Dulles went beyond Pax- States and Canada. NASSH was designed to attract 
son’s safety valve and evolutionary perspectives to a broader scholarly membership, including women, 
point out more positively that popular 20th-cen- Canadians, scholars beyond North America, and 
tury recreational pursuits—including sport—were sport historians from disciplines beyond physical 
well liked because they were satisfying to the U.S. education. It began publishing Journal of Sport 
public (Struna, 1997). Furthermore, a broad range History in 1974, and a report issued in 1985 identi- 
of people seemingly had access to them, indicating fied this publication as the seventh most frequently 
to Dulles that U.S. democracy had come of age cited history journal among the hundreds in exis- 
(Popey1997): tence (Struna, 1997). During this same period, the 

After World War II, historian John Betts com- academic study of the history of sport and physical 
pleted an important doctoral dissertation titled activity was advancing throughout the world. J.A. 
“Organized Sport in Industrial America” (1952). He Mangan reorganized the British Journal of Sport 
stressed that sport played an active role in society History, founded in 1984, into the International 
by helping bind people together, and he highlighted Journal of the History of Sport in 1987 to better 
the ways in which late 19th-century entrepreneurs encapsulate the global reach of the publication 
had harnessed a variety of new manufacturing pro- (Vamplew, 2020). The International Society for the 
cesses, new forms of transportation, and new forms History of Physical Education and Sport (ISHPES) 
of communication to shape sport into a profitable was formed in 1989 from the merger of two existing 
commercial enterprise (Pope, 1997; Struna, 1997). organizations: the International Committee for the 
In sharp contrast to Betts’ active model, journalist History of Sport and Physical Education (founded 
Robert Boyle offered a passive model of sport a in 1967) and the International Association for the 
decade later in Sport—Mirror of American Life History of Physical Education and Sport (founded 
(1963). As the title suggests, Boyle viewed sport as in 1973). The British Society of Sports History, the 
a mirror that simply reflected society. Both Betts’ Australian Society for Sports History, and the Euro- 
and Boyle’s work exerted considerable influence pean Committee for Sports History are among the 
on the work of other sport historians. many national and regional scholarly organizations 

The ranks of sport historians began to grow in devoted to this vibrant area of study. 
the 1960s, but no scholarly association yet existed Supported by a growing number of international 
to help the subdiscipline advance. The first attempt organizations dedicated to the study of physical 
to remedy this lack occurred in 1962 when Marvin activity and sport in the past, the subdiscipline con- 
Eyler, Seward Staley, and Earle Zeigler worked to tinued to grow. Whereas previously scholars with 
develop a section for sport history in the College different academic backgrounds—physical educa- 
Physical Education Association, which was soon tors interested in history or historians interested in 
renamed the National College Physical Education sport—were the ones who studied and generated 



Chapter 4| History of Physical Activity 

knowledge about the history of physical activity, academic positions dedicated to studying physical 
academics increasingly specialized in the topic at activity and sport in the past. Physical activity his- 
the end of the 20th century. Institutions around the torians therefore shifted and found new academic 
world added departments devoted to studying the homes in burgeoning programs. Many of the lead- 
history of sport and physical activity. Examples in ing scholars in the subdiscipline currently reside 
the United States included the University of lowa’s in kinesiology or sport management departments. 
Sport Studies specialization, the Ohio State Uni- For example, a 2014 assessment of NASSH mem- 
versity’s Sport Humanities program, Pennsylvania bers’ departmental homes found that 42.5 percent 
State University’s History and Philosophy of Sport resided in kinesiology, physical education, or sport 
program, and the University of Texas’s Physical management and 31.5 percent in history (Schultz, 
Culture and Sport Studies program. Examples from 2016). More and more history of physical activity 
other countries included De Montfort University’s and sport scholars are teaching and researching 
International Centre of Sport History and Culture under the kinesiology and sport management 
(United Kingdom), the German Sport University umbrellas (Wilde & Seifried, 2018). 
Cologne’s Institute of Sport History (Germany), Physical activity historians have broadened their 
and Western University’s Sociocultural Studies expertise to include teaching and studying the 
program (Canada). history of physical culture, physical movement, 

The number of scholars dedicated to the his- sport business, sport exercise, and sport medicine. 
tory of physical activity and sport increased in the Although the academic homes of physical activity 
1990s; however, they faced questions about the historians have shifted, researching physical activity 
legitimacy of their studies as well as their academic in the past continues to be an important area of 
home—trends that continue today. Many historians study in the 21st century. 
in history departments shied away from focusing 
on physical activity and sport, deeming it trivial 
and unworthy of serious academic analysis (Riess, Research Methods for History 
1990). In addition, a global recession in 2008 of Physical Activity 
reduced the number of departments and programs 
devoted specifically to the history of sport and As previously noted, in the 1970s and 1980s, research 

physical activity. Due to financial pressures, some in sport history expanded in several directions (Pope, 

institutions eliminated or reduced the number of 1997; Struna, 1997). For one thing, scholars began 

Kinesiology Colleagues | 

Alison Wrynn 
Alison Wrynn, Associate Vice Chancellor of Academic Programs, 
Innovations and Faculty Development at the California State Uni- 
versity, specializes in the history of sport and kinesiology. She is a 
widely published historian with a focus on women and girls in sport 
and physical activity. Wrynn is also a voracious reader who, unsur- 
prisingly, was drawn to biographies as a child. Her professional 
training began at Springfield College, the birthplace of basketball 
and an early leader in the field of kinesiology, where she majored 

in physical education and was surrounded by the history of the 

field on a daily basis. She also trained at UC Berkeley with one of 

the leading sport history scholars in the world, Dr. Roberta Park. 

Wrynn has traveled all over the world to conduct research and 

attend conferences. As she says, “It’s gratifying to see the disci- 

pline of sport history grow and mature.” In addition, as the first Photo courtesy of Jennifer sss TEL me 

female editor of the Journal of Sport History, she has encouraged nia State University, r Wicks//T Thhe e CaClailfiofror.  

women, young scholars, and those doing research who might be 

considered less “traditional” to submit their work in order to advance the field. 



Gal 86 Introduction to Kinesiology 

using new analytical frameworks, or sets of general sider traditional ways of producing historical 

concepts or ideas, to make sense of the historical knowledge and contends that there is no single or 

information they collected. The first framework, correct version of the past. For example, whereas 

modernization theory, emphasized that the rise of a straightforward reading of official International 

modern sport occurred during the Industrial Revolu- Olympic Committee archival documents would 
tion as U.S. society shifted away from agricultural and paint one picture of the 1996 Atlanta Olympics, 

local economies toward city-based industries rooted interviews with individuals displaced by the 
in science and technology. During this process, Games or analysis of graffiti painted in protest 
sports changed from relatively unspecialized games would paint another. In 2005 and 2006, respec- 
to highly organized contests involving many rules tively, two influential books were published that 
and specialized playing positions. The application encouraged this shift in sport history: Douglas 
of modernization theory to sport was pioneered by Booth’s The Field: Truth and Fiction in Sport His- 
Allen Guttmann in his book From Ritual to Record: tory and Murray G. Phillips’s Deconstructing Sport 
The Nature of Modern Sports (1978). History: A Postmodern Analysis. These two books 

The second conceptual framework emphasized called on sport historians to embrace postmodern- 
human agency and suggested that people were ism when discussing physical activity in the past. 
actively involved in developing or constructing Embracing elements of postmodernism has helped 
their own sports. Research in this vein focused move physical activity historical scholarship from 
on the details of how this construction took place descriptive, empirically based social histories to 
(Pope, 1997; Struna, 1997). One of the earliest new analyses of texts, rituals, and meanings (Cahn, 
works to use this approach was Stephen Hardy’s 2014). Scholars not only offer various explana- 
(1982) book, mentioned earlier, on sport and rec- tions for the history of physical activity but also 
reation in Boston after the Civil War. Hardy pointed question their own role in interpreting the past 
to many local struggles among middle-class and (Booth, 2005; Phillips, 2006). 
working-class groups—often tinged with ethnic dis- Thus, building on a small base of scholarly 
tinctions—that occurred as Bostonians went about knowledge gathered earlier in the 20th century, the 
structuring their sport and recreational activities. subdiscipline of the history of physical activity grew 

During the 1980s and 1990s, other scholars in size, sophistication, and scope from the 1960s 
expanded the focus on human agency to explore onward. Scholars initially focused on sport, but since 
gender and racial differences in sport and physical the 1980s they have also given more attention to 
activity. Scholars like Roberta J. Park, Kathy Peiss, the histories of exercise, health, fitness, movement, 
Catriona Parrat, Gertrud Pfister, Nancy Struna, physical culture, and sport science. 
and Nancy Theberge broadened the exploration Now that you’ve learned about the goals of his- 
of women and physical activity. They and others tory of physical activity, as well as the chronological 
started to address the many ways in which gender development of the subdiscipline, let’s look at how 
relations shaped physical activity in the past. As a scholars produce this knowledge. How do they 
result, a significant number of books focusing on find out what happened, who was involved, when 
women’s physical activity and sport appeared in the and where things took place, and why? In some 
1990s (Cahn, 1994; Guttmann, 1991; Hargreaves, ways, the process resembles what detectives and 
1994; Vertinsky, 1994). These books challenged pre- attorneys do when they hunt for evidence to recon- 
vious assumptions about women’s supposed frailty struct important details of a crime. Specifically, 
to highlight how social expectations hindered the process involves locating evidence; critiquing 
female athleticism. Also at this time, sport historians and examining it; and piecing it together into a 
started to highlight the stories of male athletes of coherent, insightful framework that explains how 
color. Articles and books on superstars like boxer and why things occurred. We can divide this pro- 
Jack Johnson (Roberts, 1983), runner Jesse Owens cess into three stages: finding sources of evidence; 
(Baker, 1986), and baseball player Jackie Robinson critiquing the sources; and examining, analyzing, 
(Tygiel, 1983) appeared, highlighting the role of and synthesizing the evidence. 
sport in both combating and maintaining racism. 

An additional conceptual framework developed Finding Sources of Evidence 
at the turn of the 21st century. Physical activity 
and sport historians started to more explicitly Think about the many physical activities that are 
incorporate the tenets of postmodernism in common today. If historians 200 years in the future 
their research. A departure from modernism, wanted to study these activities, what sorts of items 
postmodernism encourages historians to recon- would be useful? All kinds of things may come to 



Chapter 4| History of Physical Activity o7 

Thinking From a Historical Perspective 

Before the 1970s, conventional historians had little interest in studying sport history. Why did these 
historians ignore sport for so long? What might have been their concerns? What challenges or 
roadblocks might they have faced in conducting historical research in the field? What characteristics 
of sport itself might have made historians slow to identify sport history as a viable research topic? 

mind: exercise videos; websites, books, articles, by Brundage, and policies from the International 
and magazines about exercise and physical fitness; Olympic Committee and other sport governing 
business records of professional sport franchises; bodies. In another example, the Museu do Futebol 
videos of televised sporting events; curriculum in Brazil houses 4,000 titles, newspapers, and mag- 
guides for school physical education; photographs azines, as well as oral histories and films dedicated 
of dance performances; policy statements from the to football (soccer) in Brazil. In Sweden, the Rik- 
National Collegiate Athletic Association; and tweets sarkivet (Swedish National Archives) contains the 
from professional athletes. papers of elite Swedish skier Inga Lowdin. Lowdin 

Of course, the list could go on and on. For participated in the Swedish Ski Championships 
instance, the digital age has brought us countless from 1935 to 1954 and later served in many lead- 
websites devoted to health, fitness, exercise, and ership positions in the governance of international 
organized sport ranging from youth activities skiing. Her papers include correspondence and 
through professional and masters-level competi- meeting minutes about the Swedish Ski Associa- 
tion. Sport fans and people seeking information tion, International Ski Federation, and International 
about health and exercise can now blog about Orienteering Federation. 
their interests, instantly share items, and express In addition to these examples, local historical 
their own reactions to what they read. These digital societies often provide rich sources of informa- 
sources will serve as a rich resource for histori- tion, and the same is true for the archives located 
cal researchers in the future. As with traditional in the library at your own college or university. 
primary and secondary resources, the historians’ Although many archives require in-person visits to 
hardest task will be to test the validity and reli- study their artifacts and documents, an increasing 
ability of the data. In addition, the sheer volume number of collections are being digitized and made 
of data available online presents its own set of available online. For example, the Olympic World 
challenges in reading, sorting through, and orga- Library contains over 10,500 documents in digital 
nizing the countless resources for further analysis format, including the official publications from the 
and interpretation. International Olympic Committee, Official Reports 

The items just discussed constitute primary of the Olympic Games, and Candidature Files of 
sources of information, meaning that they were bid cities. Such digitization efforts make archival 
produced in the society and period being studied. materials more accessible to sport historians from 
However, where would scholars find them? We can different parts of the world. 
only guess where such things might be stored in the Historical reports written by people in later 
future, but we know where historians look today: periods—referred to as secondary sources—can 
libraries, archives (storage facilities for documents be useful for finding primary sources. Examples of 
from people and organizations deemed important), secondary sources include a journal article written 
and private collections (Struna, 1996a). In addition, in the 1980s about Black athletes who participated 
researchers sometimes interview people to tap their in intercollegiate athletics in the 1930s and 1940s, 
memories of life in earlier times. as well as a book-length report produced in the 

Relevant materials are scattered throughout the 1990s on physical activity in the American colo- 
world. For example, the University of Illinois in nies. Authors of such sources may include detailed 
the United States is home to the Avery Brundage notes pointing to the nature and location of spe- 

Collection. Brundage was president of the Inter- cific information (i.e., primary sources and other 

national Olympic Committee from 1952 to 1972. secondary sources) used in their investigations. In 

The collection contains items such as letters to and addition, most libraries have electronic databases 

from Brundage, books, pamphlets, scrapbooks, to help you locate sources, and most of them are 

Brundage’s notes on various topics, speeches given accessible online. 



EG 88 introduction to Kinesiology 

Critiquing the Sources 1982; Pope, 1997; Struna, 1996a, 1996b)—and there 

are probably as many approaches to analysis and 
After you locate primary sources, you must scruti- synthesis as there are researchers. The main goal 
nize them carefully for authenticity and credibility. is to piece together the evidence in order to gain 
Sources that are authentic and credible make your a detailed understanding of what happened, as 
historical research believable. Consider the case well as how and why (Shafer, 1980; Struna, 1996a). 
of written documents such as newspaper articles, 
books, and letters. Determining the authenticity 
of such sources involves identifying who wrote a KeEY POINT 2 e 
given piece and when. You might learn that a doc- 

Historical research involves finding sources that contain 
ument was written many years after the events it 

evidence about past events, critiquing the sources for 
describes or that the author listed on the document 
was not the person who wrote it. For example, if authenticity and credibility, and analyzing the data 

a letter dated as being from the 17th century uses contained in the sources in order to learn how and 

the phrase “didn’t get to first base,” then you can why things happened. 
be sure that it was written much later because this 
term comes from baseball, which didn’t exist until 
much later (Shafer, 1980). Similarly, if the ink used Overview of Knowledge 
to publish a certain report wasn’t manufactured in History of Physical Activity 
until several years after the indicated date, then 
you know that the piece was actually written later. Now that you know what historians of physical 
(Such a determination would require a technical activity do, let’s look at some of the fascinating 
specialist.) information they’ve discovered. The body of knowl- 

Determining the credibility of written documents edge is large and complex; it deals with many soci- 
helps you interpret them. Specifically, the rule of eties worldwide and covers many periods. Here, we 
context encourages you to make sense of a doc- touch on a few highlights to provide a well-rounded 
ument’s language in relation to what the words perspective of kinesiology and to stimulate your 
meant to people in the society in which it was interest in taking a sport history course. 
produced. The rule of perspective requires you to If you were a boy living in the Greek city-state 
examine an author’s relationship to the events that of Sparta during the 6th century BCE, you would 
he or she describes and how the author obtained receive more extensive and harsher physical 
the information. The rule of omission or free editing activity training than would a boy in the city-state 
reminds you that you always have partial records of Athens, who would receive a more balanced 
of events, not the complete events themselves; physical and intellectual education. In both places, 
therefore, it is important to locate multiple sources however, the physical activity instruction would 
to round out your evidence (Struna, 1996a). pursue the goal of preparing you for military ser- 

vice. Although the ancient Greeks considered the 

Examining, Analyzing, Olympic Games to be similar to warfare in com- 

and Synthesizing the Evidence petitiveness, this prestigious event for full-fledged 
citizens was distinct from the brutal gladiators’ 

After you have located authentic and credible contests—which involved mostly slaves and con- 
sources, you should examine the evidence to find victs—that were staged several hundred years later 
information that addresses the tentative hypothe- in the Roman Empire. In turn, the Roman contests 
ses or research questions that you established at differed greatly from the informal, rough team ball 
the beginning of your investigation. The goal is to games played by European peasants in the Middle 
describe events in detail and then analyze them Ages and from the high-profile women’s gymnastics 
in order to learn how and why things took place. performed in the Olympics of the late 20th century. 
Historians accomplish this goal by placing events We haven’t even mentioned other forms of physi- 
in an analytical framework that uses trends and cal activity, such as dance and exercise! Thus, it is 
relationships in the events themselves or theoretical indeed a monumental task to understand the ways 
models from the social sciences. You have already in which physical activities have fit into societies 
seen three examples of analytical frameworks—the around the world since the beginning of history. 
binding together in community framework (Betts, In North America, much is known about the his- 
1952), the modernization framework (Guttmann, tory of physical activity in Western civilizations— 
1978), and the human agency framework (Hardy, especially ancient Greece and Rome, Europe, 



Chapter 4] History of Physical Activity 8° 

Canada, and the United States. We must recognize, onset of modern, organized sport. 
however, that rich physical activity traditions have * 1900 to 1950: North American society was 
also been developed by people in Africa, Asia, characterized by the growth of consum- 
Australia and New Zealand, the Indian subconti- 

erism, immigration, and democratization. 
nent, Central and South America, the Caribbean The period also included a major economic 
region, and the Pacific Islands. These traditions depression and two world wars. 
include a variety of martial arts in Asian societ- 

* 1950 to present: North American society was 
ies, sumo wrestling in Japan, ball games played 
in high-walled courts in native Central Am characterized by the growth of electronic 

erican 
communication, new global relationships, 

civilizations, an African martial art brought to the 
immigration, and democratization. The 

Atlantic and Caribbean coasts of South America, 
period also included the Cold War, the 

and a sport in Afghanistan involving hundreds of 
Korean War, the Vietnam War, the first Iraq 

mounted horsemen who simultaneously try to gain 
War, September 11, a global recession, and 

possession of a goat or calf carcass. Historical infor- 
the COVID pandemic. 

mation exists about all of these activities. In this 
text, however, we focus on the history of physical For each of these periods, we’ll examine the 
activity in North America. following aspects: 

After an earlier trickle of travelers, British and 
¢ Participation in physical activity 

European colonists began arriving in North Amer- 
ica in greater numbers in the early 1600s. Initially, e Physical activity professions 

people worked hard to establish themselves in ¢ Scholarly knowledge about physical activity 
unfamiliar and often harsh environments. These 
hardships, coupled in some places with strict reli- Pre-1840: Native American Sport 
gious prohibitions against idleness and amusement, 
meant that participation in sport and games was and European Settlement 
limited. Nevertheless, people sometimes engaged The centuries before 1840 are marked by Native 
in their own versions of traditional British and American and European colonial interactions. 
European sport and recreational activities. Partic- Native Americans lived throughout North, Central, 
ipation increased as the colonists became more and South America, with many different tribal 
established and religious sanctions were lifted. affiliations. The diverse customs, cultures, and 
Activities included horse racing, fishing, hunting, politics of indigenous peoples makes it impossible 
sailing, boat racing, team ball games, sleigh races, to discuss their physical activities as a cohesive 
skating, footracing, boxing, wrestling, animal bait- entity. The games and sports enjoyed by Native 
ing (in which a wild animal such as a bear was Americans varied, but they were eventually influ- 
tied by a chain and attacked, often by dogs or rats), enced by contact with European colonizers. When 
cockfighting, and billiards. Some of these activities English, French, and Spanish colonizers arrived in 
were commercialized and yielded profits for pro- the Americas, they brought their own recreational 
moters; gambling was also common (Baker, 1988; traditions. The New England Puritans frowned 
Lucas & Smith, 1978; Struna, 1996b). upon physical games for religious reasons, while 

Next, we’ll look more closely at physical activity the Southern colonists used sport to signify wealth. 
in North America during four periods: These divergent viewpoints laid the foundation for 

sporting practices after the American Revolution in 
¢ Pre-1840: North American society was 

the newly formed United States. 
characterized by interactions among Native 
American and indigenous peoples, as well as Participation in Physical Activity 
European colonization and settlement. The 

Native Americans participated in a variety of 
period included the American Revolution 

physical activities before the arrival of European 
and the formation of the United States. 

colonizers. In North America, Native people 
* 1840 to 1900: North American society enjoyed everything from low-stakes games for 

was characterized by industrialization, the children to major sporting events for adults. Some 
growth of science and technology, immi- activities had almost universal appeal, and others 
gration, urbanization, democratization, were contested by specific groups; the types of 
and westward expansion. The period also activities and sports depended on the tribe, cli- 
included the American Civil War and the matic conditions, and geographic location. Many 



a 90 introduction to Kinesiology 

Native Americans engaged in stick and ball games, concept, no specific professional attention was 

such as lacrosse and shinny, a game comparable granted to physical activity, games, or sport during 

to field hockey. Various Native American tribes the pre-1840 time period. Likewise, scholarly atten- 

played games that involved sticks and balls; how- tion on physical activity was scant. 

ever, the name /acrosse comes from the French However, it is important to consider how schol- 

missionaries who called the activity /a crosse, or ars have pieced together information about physical 
“the stick,” in French. Native American lacrosse activities before 1840. Knowledge about this time 
was a grueling affair that could traverse miles period is largely derived from European accounts. 
and last days. While shinny was not as popular as No written history from Native Americans before 
lacrosse, it was also played with a ball and stick. European contact exists. Therefore, much of what 
Players passed a ball on the ground using a curved we know about Native American physical activ- 
stick. Non-ball games included archery, footraces, ity and sports comes from the writings of early 
and swimming. Although traditions varied, Native European colonizers. This not only limits what is 
tribes oftentimes imbued their physical exertions available, but it also contains certain partialities. 
with various meanings, including ceremonial and European settlers described Native American games 
ritualistic purposes, as well as physical preparation and sports from their own perspectives, most often 

(Oxedine, 1995). painting them as either overly violent or deeply 
Native American games and sport changed with religious (Eisen, 1995). Neither viewpoint speaks 

European contact. Like Native American physical to the varied and rich tradition of Native Ameri- 
activities, sport during the colonial times assumed can customs. Scholars are therefore continuously 
different forms. Perhaps most notably, viewpoints working to track down more sources to offer a 
in the 13 British colonies diverged on the accept- more complete picture. They are studying artifacts, 
ability of games, which stemmed from the different folklore, mythology, and traditions. For example, 
motivations in colonization. As noted in the intro- archeologists have uncovered physical objects that 
duction to this chapter, Puritans in New England help demonstrate the sporting practices of different 
objected to recreation. They settled in New England indigenous people. The knowledge about physical 
for religious reasons and believed leisure activities activity before 1840 is always growing. 
were an idle waste of time. For example, Puritan 
leaders of the Massachusetts Bay Colony prohibited 1840 to 1900: Industrialization 
shuffleboard in 1647 and bowling in 1650 (Struna, 
1977). In contrast, those in the Southern colonies and Westward Expansion 
settled for economic reasons. Recreation was there- From the mid-1800s to about 1900, the economy, 
fore more accepted, and wealthy White men used population, and geography of the United States and 
sport to signify their social status. Southerners also Canada expanded. These developments manifested 
participated in the slave trade, which extended into themselves in diverse ways. The growth of business 
the sporting realm. White owners forced slaves into and industry was fueled by new developments in 
certain activities, such as boxing and horseracing, science and technology. Meanwhile, as city popu- 
but slaves also independently engaged in recreation lations mushroomed, people’s health was threat- 
and games, such as ball games, jumping, running, ened by major sanitation problems, crowded living 
and wrestling. Sport allowed slaves a degree of conditions, lack of space for physical exercise, and 
independence and opportunity for community unsafe factories. At the same time, the advent of 
bonding (Wiggins, 2018). Most forms of physical more leisure time sparked interest in establishing 
activity and recreation were momentarily sidelined city parks and playgrounds, as well as in developing 
during the American Revolution. After gaining more commercial entertainment and amusements, 
independence from Britain, the people of the such as spectator sports. In addition, many new 
newly formed United States were too busy for most schools and colleges opened, offering both phys- 
physical pursuits as the focus was on governing ical training and student-run intercollegiate sport 
the new republic. programs. The citizenry also started buying more 

products in response to glimpses of the “good life” 
Physical Activity Professions and Scholarly seen in newspapers, magazines, and eventually 
Knowledge About Physical Activity movies. As westward expansion continued, high- 
An identifiable physical activity profession did not lighted by the completion of the transcontinental 
appear in the United States until the late 19th cen- railroad in the United States, massive numbers of 
tury. Because physical activity was not a universal European and British immigrants arrived, along 



Chapter 4 |H istory of Physical Activity o1 

with Asians on the West Coast. The Civil War (1861 Calls for more vigorous physical activity—espe- 
to 1865) exacted a terrible toll of death, destruction, cially for boys and men—were issued by physi- 
and disruption, but it also led to legal affirmation cians, writers, and teachers, who addressed primar- 
of the ideal of racial equality—an important goal ily the White middle class and social elites. These 
in U.S. society ever since. authorities coupled their notions of the importance 

of health reform with ideas from England about 
Participation in Physical Activity the value of sport for developing moral character 
Liberal religious and philosophical currents had and manliness. As the century progressed, physical 
begun to flow together in the early decades of the activity grew increasingly attractive and popular. 
19th century, and they emphasized the view that Many professionals also recommended mod- 
a human being’s body, mind, and soul formed an erate exercises for improving the health of girls 
integrated whole. This perspective promoted the and women. However, straining hard in exercise 
importance of keeping one’s body healthy in order or competitive sport was usually considered unla- 
to achieve peak mental functioning and moral rea- dylike and even dangerous for women’s physical 
soning. Some even believed that good health prac- well-being and childbearing ability (Vertinsky, 
tices indicated a morally righteous person in the 1994). Even so, by the end of the 19th century, 
eyes of God. This thinking, combined with squalid some girls and women were involved in vigorous 
conditions in overcrowded cities and a nationalistic physical pursuits. 
desire to make the United States self-sufficient, led During this time, European systems of gym- 

to widespread efforts throughout most of the 19th nastics, especially those originating in Germany 
century to improve people’s health. The recom- and Sweden, gained an important foothold in the 
mended practices included proper diet and exercise United States. German cultural societies called 
(Berryman, 1989; Whorton, 1982). Turnvereins eventually offered well-equipped gym- 

SKATING ON THE LADIES’ SKATING-POND IN CENTRAL PARK, NEW YORK. 

Public spaces, such as skating ponds in New York City's Central Park, provided residents of crowded cities with places 

to participate in healthy activities. 

Image from Harper's Weekly, 1860, Skating on The Ladies’ Skating Pond. 



mg 92 Introduction to Kinesiology 

nastics facilities in many North American cities. By and German systems were commonly used, as 

1867, 148 of these facilities existed in the United were exercise programs developed by Americans 

States, serving more than 10,000 members (Swan- that centered on calisthenics and lightweight 

son & Spears, 1995). The programs centered on equipment. Such programs focused primarily 

exercise performed on heavy equipment, such as on achieving health through fitness and were 

parallel bars, vaulting horses, and hanging rings. In promulgated by physical education leaders such 

contrast, the Swedish system involved calisthenics as Edward Hitchcock (Amherst College), Dudley 

and exercises performed with lighter equipment, Allen Sargent (Harvard University), and Delphine 

such as dumbbells, wooden pins, long rods, and Hannah (Oberlin College). Sport was not usually 

weights. Elements from both systems, as well as included in these classes but was practiced in 
other exercise programs developed by Americans, extracurricular settings. Originally taking the form 

grew increasingly popular in YMCAs and YWCAs of low-key intramural activities, sport served as 
and at city parks and playgrounds. a rich supplement to the often-stodgy exercise 

Sports were popular with many of the new classes (Rudolph, 1962; Smith, 1988). Student-run 

immigrants who arrived in the United States and intercollegiate competition appeared around the 
Canada from 1840 onward. They played baseball middle of the 19th century and gathered steam in 
as well as American and Canadian football, which the 1870s. The most common intercollegiate sports 
evolved from rugby and soccer later in the century. for male students were American football, crew, 

Youngsters often learned American sports and baseball, and track and field. 

games at local playgrounds, and many civic leaders College and university administrators believed 
hoped that immigrants’ participation would speed that intercollegiate sport could help recruit new 
their assimilation into U.S. society. Immigrants students, attract alumni contributions, and promote 
also sought to use physical activities to keep the a sense of community in an increasingly diverse 
cultures of their homelands alive. Many belonged student body. According to thinking that arrived 
to special clubs in which sport, exercise, and other on North American shores from England, sport 
forms of recreation were prominent. Examples in could also be used to develop leadership, vigorous 
the city of Boston included the Boston Turnverein, manliness, and upstanding moral character, which 
which featured gymnastics and catered to German were considered to be desirable qualities for col- 
immigrants; the Caledonian Club, devoted to Scot- lege men. For all of these reasons, athletics were 
tish culture and offering an array of sports and considered too important to leave in the hands of 
games, such as caber toss, racing, and pole vault; students; as a result, campus administrators, faculty, 
the Irish Athletic Club, the Irish American Athletic and coaches gradually took control. 
Club, the Ancient Order of Hibernians, the Boston During this era, fewer sport opportunities were 
Hurling Club, and the Shamrock Hurling Club, available for college women, although they did 
all of which focused on Irish sports and games, engage in occasional intercollegiate competition 
including oarsmen’s regattas, stone throwing, and and somewhat more frequent intramural competi- 
hurling; and cricket clubs formed by West Indian tion. In the 1870s and 1880s, however, many female 
immigrants (Hardy, 1982). physical education faculty began including sport 

Other immigrants took part in sports and amuse- activities in their classes (Swanson & Spears, 1995). 
ments that, at the time, were considered less than Still, women who wanted to participate in com- 
respectable by members of mainstream society. These petitive sports faced societal concerns about the 
activities included prizefighting, billiards, bowling, supposed negative effects of strenuous and highly 
cycling, and wrestling. Prizefighting was dominated competitive physical activities on women and girls. 
by the Irish for several decades; later in the century, These concerns were, of course, unfounded, and 
boxing gyms could be found in Black neighborhoods research by physical education faculty eventually 
(Gorn, 1986). After the Civil War, Black Americans helped eliminate this bias. Until that time, women 
participated in some mainstream sports—professional were forced to avoid sports in which injuries were 
baseball and horse racing, for example. But by 1890, more likely (e.g., football) in favor of sports like 
White owners and organizers had banned Black ath- tennis or golf, and they engaged in modified ver- 
letes, forcing most Black Americans into segregated sions of men’s sports (softball instead of baseball). 
leagues and organizations, such as the Negro National For example, the early rules of women’s basketball 
League for baseball. divided the court into thirds and limited players’ 

In school and college physical activity classes, movements to one section; therefore, women would 
gymnastics exercise was preeminent. The Swedish not run the entire length of the floor. In these ways, 



Chapter 4| History of Physical Activity °3 

a delicate balance was struck between making com- 
petition available to college women and keeping 
the activities acceptable to non-physical education 
faculty and campus administrators (Park, 1987b). 

lM CEG.T LNl a Steelle ae a 
Throughout the 19th century in the United States, 
interest increased in physical activities, including 
gymnastics exercises, baseball, football, crew, track 
and field, horse racing, boxing, bicycling, and less well- 
known sports tied to people’s ethnic origins. 

Beyond schools and colleges, many amateur 
baseball teams were on their way to becoming 
professionalized in the 1860s as spectators were 
charged admission fees and players were paid. 
Baseball developed an avid following, and newspa- 
pers gave it the most coverage of any sport (Adel- 
man, 1986). By the 1880s, the most popular sports 
were baseball, horse racing, and prizefighting. 

U.S. athletes also competed in a new amateur 
event developed by Europeans and first held in 
Athens, Greece, in 1896—the modern Olympic 
Games. The United States fielded a team of 10 
male track-and-field competitors, all of whom 
were collegians or ex-collegians. These competitors 
chalked up nine victories in 12 events, along with 
five second-place finishes. Three other American Aaron Molyneaux Hewlett was an early professional in the 

athletes—two pistol shooters and one swimmer— physical activity world who served as the first director of 
the Harvard College Gymnasium. 

also competed in the Games and garnered two 
Harvard University Archives, HUP Hewlett, A. Molyneaux (3a). 

victories in the sharpshooting events. 

Physical Activity Professions 
An identifiable physical activity profession did immigrated to the United States. Some of them 

not appear in the United States until the late 19th wrote about the physical, intellectual, and moral 

century. Nevertheless, a variety of practitioners in benefits of exercise and sport. Some developed 

earlier decades focused at least some of their work exercise programs in schools and colleges. Others 

on physical activity. These practitioners included worked to establish various European gymnastics 

physicians, athletes, journalists, educators, minis- systems on U.S. soil. Some wrote popular self-help 

ters, health reform advocates, entrepreneurs, and manuals about healthy living that included how-to 

a handful of European gymnastics specialists who information on exercise routines. A few became 

Curriculum Changes in Physical Education 

In the late 19th century, physical education programs emphasized health and activities focusing on 

calisthenics; sport was not usually included in men’s physical education classes, although it was 

an integral part of the curriculum in many women’s colleges. What do you think was the reason for 

this emphasis? What types of activities have been included in your physical education classes in 

high school and college? What do you think caused the change between what was offered in the 

1890s and what is offered today? 



ms 94 Introduction to Kinesiology 

professional athletes in sports such as horse racing, Scholarly Knowledge About Physical Activity 
pedestrianism (long-distance walking), boxing, and Scientific discoveries in the 19th century produced 
baseball. Others tried to sort out the best training much new information about human anatomy and 
techniques for athletic success, became coaches, physiology. By the 1840s, improved microscopes 
or bankrolled professional sports. permitted more detailed studies of phenom- 

By the 1880s, a climate of intense interest in ena such as oxygen transport in blood, energy 
exercise and sport had developed in the United transformation in muscles, and the anatomy and 
States. More generally, many professions were functioning of the nervous system (Park, 1987a). 
beginning to organize in response to the growing Such information was used later in the century by 
need for people with specialized knowledge and scholars working to better understand the biolog- 
skills in technologically based businesses and ical effects of physical activity on the human body. 
industries. As a result, efforts were launched to This knowledge was also incorporated by some 
develop more stringent educational standards for educators into physical education teacher train- 
new practitioners. ing programs. For example, Edward Hartwell, an 

In this atmosphere, the physical education associate in physical training and director of the 
teaching profession took root (Park, 1987a), thus gymnasium at Johns Hopkins University, published 
becoming the first recognizable physical activity an article in 1887 titled “On the Physiology of 
profession in the United States. In 1885, some 60 Exercise.” George Fitz, an instructor and researcher 
people who wanted to promote the new profession in physiology and hygiene at Harvard University, 
formed the American Association for the Advance- established a 4-year undergraduate program called 
ment of Physical Education. Although university Anatomy, Physiology, and Physical Training. Not 
programs of physical education remained segre- far from Harvard, the Boston Normal School of 
gated for decades, physical education did involve Gymnastics—a 2-year institution providing physical 
professional collaboration between men and education teacher training that attracted mostly 
women on the faculty. After several name changes female students—offered a curriculum focused on 
and adjustments in its mission, the AAAPE is known Swedish gymnastics that also included a variety of 
today as SHAPE America, or the Society of Health basic science courses taught by well-known schol- 
and Physical Educators. 

ars from major universities around Boston. These 
excursions into the biological sciences by early 

PREM POI S20 a ee leaders in physical education demonstrate the value 
that they placed on developing a scientific base 

The earliest identifiable U.S. physical activity profes- for the emerging profession of physical education 
sion—teaching physical education—was established in teaching (Gerber, 1971; Park, 1987b). 
the late 19th century during a period of high interest 
in physical activity for health among college students 
and the general public. KEY POINT < = = ee eee 

Though scholarly knowledge about physical activity 
became important in a few teaching training curric- 

Several teacher training programs were inau- 
ulums in the late 19th century, it more often took a 

gurated in physical education, primarily in the 
northeastern United States, and they varied in backseat to learning physical activities and practical 

length from a few weeks to about 2 years. Some knowledge about teaching them. 

of the most famous were the Sanatory Gymna- 
sium (opened near Harvard University in 1881 by 

Despite this new interest in the sciences, scien- 
Dudley Sargent and renamed the Normal School 

tific curriculums were outnumbered by professional 
of Physical Training in 1894), the Harvard Summer 

programs that focused on learning physical activi- 
School of Physical Education (opened in 1887 by 

ties and how to teach them. By the end of the 19th 
Dudley Sargent), and the Boston Normal School of 

century, the emphasis was clearly placed on the 
Gymnastics (opened in 1889 by Mary Hemenway 

professional programs and on the positive social 
and Amy Morris Homans). Around the turn of the 

values that students could learn by participating 
century, several 4-year bachelor’s degree programs 

in both play and sport. Investigations into the 
were initiated for the preparation of physical edu- 

biological mechanisms underlying physical activity 
cation teachers. 

were not completely curtailed, but it was not until 



Chapter 4 | History of Physical Activity 

the 1960s that scientific information again moved Cubs owner and chewing-gum magnate Philip K. 
to center stage in college and university physical Wrigley to organize the All-American Girls Pro- 
education curriculums (Park, 1987a). fessional Baseball League, which played in the 

Midwest from 1943 to 1954. 
1900 to 1950: Consumerism, Intercollegiate sport during this era was domi- 

nated by American football. Major college games 
Immigration, Democratization 

received widespread news coverage and served as 
In the first half of the 20th century, U.S. industry occasions for lively partying and revelry. By 1903, 
perfected mass production and churned out a Harvard University was home to a stadium seating 
wide variety of consumer goods, ranging from 40,000 fans, and by 1930 seven of the “concrete 
automobiles to refrigerators to canned food. With giants” on college campuses could hold more than 
readily available products, entrepreneurs stepped 70,000 people (Rader, 1990; Smith, 1988). 
up their advertising to encourage members of the For a time, competitive sports for boys were 
public to become enthusiastic consumers. The common in high schools and elementary schools, 
rise of consumer culture also benefited big-time on playgrounds, and in youth service agencies 
intercollegiate sport and professional baseball and such as YMCAs. In the 1930s, elementary school 
football leagues, which became major parts of the competition began to decline as physical education 
growing entertainment industry. Meanwhile, many teachers complained about the high stress of com- 
new immigrants, especially from southern Europe, petition. However, many people still wanted com- 
arrived on American shores, thus adding more petition for youngsters, and the void was filled by 
ethnic diversity to an already multifaceted popula- new programs designed by city recreation depart- 
tion. At the same time, U.S. society made progress ments and organizations such as Little League 
toward the democratic ideal of equal opportunity Baseball (formed in 1939) and Biddy Basketball 
and social justice, as women won the right to vote (formed in 1950). 
and Black Americans were hired in greater numbers Girls’ and women’s sports in this era were 
for federally funded jobs. Full achievement of social subdued in comparison with the major boys’ and 
equity, however, remained distant and elusive. In men’s events and their accompanying publicity 
addition, the severe economic depression that and hoopla. A few women did achieve national 
began in 1929 left personal, lifelong scars on mas- and international success in sports such as tennis, 
sive numbers of Americans who suffered through it. basketball, golf, long-distance swimming, and 
Many other horrible and unforgettable disruptions track and field. For the most part, women trained 
also occurred during World War I (1914 to 1918) and competed outside the educational system, in 
and World War II (1939 to 1945). settings such as private country clubs and indus- 

try-sponsored leagues. For example, in 1930, 
Participation in Physical Activity Mildred “Babe” Didrikson was offered a job as 
During the first half of the 20th century, com- a stenographer at Employers Casualty Insurance 

petitive sport was in the limelight. In particular, Company in Dallas so that she could play for the 

professional baseball, professional boxing, horse company’s Golden Cyclones basketball team. The 

racing, and collegiate American football—all men’s company also sponsored her participation in the 

sports—were especially popular with fans. In Amateur Athletic Union’s national track-and-field 

professional baseball, the American League and championships in 1932. Her phenomenal success 

National League joined forces in 1903 to keep led her to the 1932 Olympics, where she won two 

player salaries in check and reduce competition gold medals and a silver (Guttmann, 1991). 

for fan loyalty. Racial prejudices forced Black In schools and colleges during the 1920s, White 

leaders to create separate leagues in the 1920s, female physical educators turned toward intramu- 

such as the Eastern Colored League and the Negro ral sports and low-key extramural competition for 

National League, which became thriving spaces for girls and women. They wanted to avoid the stress 

Black athletes, coaches, and owners. Professional of high-level competition and to encourage all girls 

basketball and American football gained a degree and women to participate. Although a few institu- 

of prominence by the 1930s, although at this point tions continued to sponsor elite sport for females, 

they were still fledgling enterprises. World War II the goal at most schools and colleges was “fun and 

temporarily put a damper on men’s professional games,” which greatly curtailed the development of 

athletics because most healthy young men entered elite female athletes in educational settings. Things 

military service. This development spurred Chicago didn’t begin to change until the late 1950s. 



BS Introduction to Kinesiology 

The Golden Age of Sport: The 1920s 

The 1920s, sometimes referred to as the Roaring Twenties, were a decade of change and excess. 

Whether one measures the change in terms of clothing fashion, political opportunity, technology, 

or popular culture, there is no doubt that a seismic shift took place in U.S. society. Change was 

apparent as women exercised their newly acquired right to vote as well as the freedom to remove 

constricting corsets. Excess was manifested in the form of stock market and real estate specula- 

tion and in increased personal spending as the United States (now free of the constraints of the 

First World War) increasingly became a consumer nation. 
Moreover, sport became one of the products consumed by a people now hungry for enter- 

tainment—be it on the stage, on the silver screen, on the radio, or in the stadium. As a result, 

whereas childhood heroes and role models had previously consisted of the titans of business and 

industry (e.g., Thomas Edison, Henry Ford, John D. Rockefeller), they now included movie stars 

such as Charlie Chaplin and Mary Pickford and sport figures such as Babe Ruth and Gertrude 
Ederle. In a nutshell, the middle class was growing, times were good for larger numbers of White 
Americans, and more people now had more leisure time to watch and follow their favorite teams 
and individual sport stars. 

Whereas earlier decades had celebrated a few athletic heroes—such as boxer John L. Sullivan 
in the 1880s and baseball pitcher Cy Young in the 1890s and early 1900s—the 1920s produced 
heroes in abundance across a wide array of sports. Representatives of this sudden explosion 
of athletic excellence and public interest in sport included Babe Ruth and Lou Gehrig (baseball), 
Bill Tilden and Helen Wills (tennis), Bobby Jones (golf), Gertrude Ederle and Johnny Weissmuller 
(swimming), Red Grange (American football), and Jack Dempsey and Gene Tunney (boxing). 

To accommodate spectator demand, larger and grander stadiums were constructed by both 
professional baseball clubs and college football programs. New York’s Yankee Stadium was opened 
in 1923 with more than 50,000 seats to meet the demands of fans flocking to see the great Ruth 
hit his astounding home runs. New college football stadiums exceeding 60,000 seats were built 
at institutions including Ohio State University (1922) and the University of Illinois (1923) to handle 
the masses of people who arrived from near and far by train and private automobile. 

This phenomenon was fueled by a media industry just beginning to realize the potential rev- 
enue available through the exploitation of commercial sport. Newspaper owners had begun to 
recognize this opportunity around the turn of the 20th century, when the sports page had made 
its debut in many large cities to meet the growing demand for coverage of major league baseball. 
In the 1920s, many of these papers began hiring talented writers such as Grantland Rice (New 
York Herald Tribune), Jonn Drebinger (New York Times), Shirley Povich (Washington Post), and Paul 
Gallico (New York Daily News), who further popularized the stars of the sports world through their 
game coverage and feature stories. 

Sports coverage gained a whole new dimension with the introduction of commercial radio in 
1924. By the end of the decade, announcers such as Graham McNamee re-created football and 
baseball games for listeners in millions of homes across the nation. Contrary to the initial fears 
of college administrators and baseball club owners that broadcasting would hurt ticket sales, 
radio coverage brought in countless new fans whose interest led them to purchase tickets to see 
in person what they had heard over the airwaves. 

In the mid-1930s, writer Paul Gallico, looking back on the tremendous growth of interest in sport 
during the 1920s, dubbed it the “Golden Age of Sport.” Today we might refer to it more accurately 
as the “First Golden Age of Sport” since we have certainly been in a similar “sport-crazed” era for 
at least the past five decades or more. In fact, given the rise of cable television and its numerous 
dedicated sport networks beginning in the 1980s, the publication of sport-specific magazines 
and almanacs, the construction of newer and ever more grandiose stadiums and arenas, and the 
creation of new and increasingly extreme competitive activities, it is fair to say that we live today 
in an unprecedented age. We can trace the roots of today’s sport mania to that amazing decade 
some 90 years ago. 



Chapter 4| History of Physical Activity 

Public interest in competitive sport was so troops (Murphy, 1995; Rice et al., 1969). On the 
pronounced in the early decades of the 20th home front, physical education teachers added 
century that sport replaced gymnastics exercise military training, such as marching drills and cal- 
as the centerpiece of most school and college isthenics, to school and college physical education 
physical education curriculums. A large number of programs. Recognition of the poor physical con- 
physical education teachers believed that student dition of the troops also served as a wake-up call 
participation in sport would help develop high after the war, spurring the expansion of school and 
moral character and other qualities needed by a college physical activity programs. By the end of 
good citizen. Students seemed more interested in the 1920s, many people could even exercise by 
physical activities that were spiced with competi- following an instructor on the radio. 
tive excitement than in the tedium of repetitious, Racial discrimination eliminated most Black 
traditional gymnastics exercises. Still, exercise did Americans from the highest levels of competitive 
not completely disappear from physical educa- sport by 1900. After Jack Johnson became the 
tion classes. Teachers sometimes replaced the old world heavyweight champion in 1908, White boxers 
gymnastics systems with expressive movements refused to compete against Black boxers, thereby 
designed to communicate ideas and feelings or with removing a path to the title. Boxing’s color line 
sport-related exercises such as shooting baskets or remained in place until Joe Louis won the title in 
batting baseballs. In addition, by the 1920s, “cor- 1937. The color line assumed different forms in 
rective” physical education classes offered special intercollegiate athletics and professional sports. 
exercises to students who faced challenges with In college basketball, the “gentleman’s agreement” 
posture, fitness, or health (Van Dalen & Bennett, limited the number of Black athletes allowed on the 
1971). court at the same time. In college football, Northern 

The U.S. military recognized the need for phys- schools with Black athletes on their teams agreed to 
ical training during World War I, when approx- sit them when competing against Southern schools. 
imately one-third of U.S. draftees were initially White NFL owners banned Black athletes from 1933 
declared unfit to serve. Moreover, recruits with to 1946; the league desegregated when the Los 
musculoskeletal incapacities such as flat feet and Angeles Rams signed Kenny Washington and Woody 
backaches deluged overseas hospitals. Recreational Strode. Major League Baseball similarly remained 
sport—organized by about 345 military athletic segregated from the late 1880s to 1947, when Jackie 
directors—was widespread and popular with the Robinson joined the Brooklyn Dodgers. 

Professional Issues in Kinesiology 

Equality: Racial Integration of Professional Sport 
When Jackie Robinson broke the race barrier that had existed since the late 1880s in major league 
baseball, he not only opened doors of opportunity for baseball players of color but also contributed 
greatly to the racial integration of the National Football League and the newly created National 
Basketball Association in the late 1940s and 1950s. Ongoing efforts to achieve this goal had 
been made over a period of decades by individuals both within and outside of professional sport. 

Sportswriters in the Black press had kept up a steady drumbeat of pressure on major league 

baseball owners, as had several politicians, both Black and White, in New York City and other 

urban centers. Another major factor in finally desegregating the sport turned out to be the large 

numbers of African Americans who served in the military during World War Il. Supporters argued 

effectively that those who fought for their country and its values should be able to pursue their 

dreams at home. Today, the issue of inequality in professional sport remains, and it is addressed 

in the form of providing access for members of underrepresented groups to leadership positions 

in coaching, administration, and sports medicine. 

Citation style: Chicago Manual of Style . 

Tygiel, Jules. Baseball’s Great Experiment: Jackie Robinson and His Legacy. New York: Oxford University Press, 

Sor 



am 98 Introduction to Kinesiology 

For people in many racial and ethnic minority continuing the trend that had started in the late 

groups, sport involvement was influenced by 19th century. Graduate programs offered advanced 

cultural heritage. For example, second-generation training for teachers, as well as academic prepa- 

Jews participated in sports such as baseball, bas- ration for becoming a college or university faculty 

ketball, and boxing—often at the local Young Men’s member. The quality of these programs improved 

Hebrew Association (YMHA) or Jewish community as research on physical activity picked up in the 

center—as a sort of middle ground that allowed late 1920s. 
them to celebrate Jewish heritage while assimi- Despite the popularity of sport during the first 

lating into mainstream U.S. society through these half of the 20th century, college and university 
popular activities (Levine, 1992). First-generation physical education curriculums did not include 
Japanese immigrants who arrived early in the much course work to prepare students for the 
20th century often used traditional perspectives occupation of coach or athletic trainer. Instead, 
from their homeland to make sense of American coaches usually came from the ranks of successful 
sports—for instance, recalling samurai principles athletes. If they worked in a school or college, they 
of courage and honor (Regalado, 1992). were often required to teach physical education 

classes as well, so they earned the necessary college 
degrees and professional teacher certifications. 

ACA G a)e1|  aseaeee  ee The few athletic trainers on the scene during this 

Sport was Americans’ favorite physical activity in the period had little formal education in health care. 

first half of the 20th century. They paid less attention In colleges and universities, they often began as 

to exercise, though interest in exercise picked up gymnasium jacks-of-all-trades who also handled 
custodial responsibilities and other duties such 

during the two world wars in order to improve general 
as repairing equipment and facilities, laundering 

physical fitness. 
clothes, driving the team bus, and maintaining 
outdoor playing fields. They sometimes met their 

Interest in exercise was renewed during World counterparts from other institutions at intercolle- 

War II. As with the First World War, some young giate athletic events and shared training techniques 

military draftees failed their induction physicals, with each other (Smith, 1979). Because elite sports 
which generated interest in improving school phys- were primarily limited to boys and men, most 

ical education. After the war, educators expanded coaches and athletic trainers were men. 

many school and college physical activity curric- This growing focus on physical activity created 

ulums in response to weaknesses observed in the a market for activity-related products and services. 

fitness of wartime military recruits; thus, sport held For example, the Cramer Company, founded in 
center stage once again (Swanson & Spears, 1995). 1922, identified a commercial niche and began sell- 

ing liniment for sprains as well as other products 
Physical Activity Professions for athletic training. In 1933, Cramer inaugurated 

The number of bachelor’s degree programs in the First Aider newsletter, which became popular 

physical education increased in the early 1900s, among high school coaches seeking to understand 

expanding to a total of about 135 by 1927 (Park, training techniques. For many years, Cramer also 

1980). Master’s degrees were also available just sponsored educational seminars for athletic train- 

after the turn of the century, and doctoral programs ers. The profession grew, but it wasn’t until 1950 

appeared in the 1920s. Undergraduate programs that a professional organization was founded—the 

focused on training physical education teachers, National Athletic Trainers’ Association. 

Sport and Ethnicity 

Think of as many examples as you can of people who share an ethnic heritage getting together 
to do the following: 

» Play or watch a sport associated with their cultural heritage 

>» Play or watch a sport that is widely popular in the United States 

Is there any overlap between your two lists? Why or why not? 



Chapter A| History of Physical Activity 

Interest in physical therapy was sparked by the At the same time, some physical education 
outbreak of World War I. By the end of the war, faculty continued to research aspects of physical 
U.S. military reconstruction aides—an entirely activity not centrally related to teaching. Examples 
female corps of nurses trained to help those who include kinesiology (biomechanics), motor abil- 
had been wounded—were receiving training in ity, motor capacity, physical fitness, and exercise 
massage, anatomy, remedial exercise, hydrotherapy, physiology. Research on these topics continued to 
electrotherapy, bandaging, kinesiology, ethics, and increase in the 1940s and 1950s but did not begin 
the psychological effects of injuries. In 1921, the to dominate the field until the 1960s. 
reconstruction aides formed the American Women’s 
Physical Therapeutic Association, which eventually 1950 to Present: Electronic 
became the present-day American Physical Therapy 
Association—the main professional association for Communication and Globalization 
physical therapists (Murphy, 1995). This therapeutic In the second half of the 20th century, electronic 
field borrowed corrective exercise knowledge from communication expanded at a breathtaking pace, 
physical education and from the research published as illustrated by advances in television, computing, 
in its journals, such as Research Quarterly (now satellites, and air travel. Television—in its infancy 
Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport) and in 1950—became a common fixture in most homes 
the American Corrective Therapy Journal (now in the following two decades. Digital computers 
Clinical Kinesiology). evolved from massive, room-sized arrays of vacuum 

tubes with limited capabilities into tiny but enor- 
Scholarly Knowledge About Physical Activity mously powerful collections of memory chips and 
At the beginning of the 20th century, a number of electronic displays. Satellites were placed in orbit, 
scholars were investigating topics such as neuro- which greatly simplified intercontinental communi- 
muscular fatigue, the vascular effects of exercise cation, and air travel became both faster and easier. 

(known today as exercise physiology), kinesiology Social media platforms developed, significantly 
(biomechanics), body measurements and proportions changing the way people consumed sports. As in 
(anthropometrics), the psychological aspects of play, past eras, each technological advance affected sport 
and the history of physical education and sport (Park, and exercise in multiple dimensions. 
1981). However, research on physical activity did At the same time, global trade expanded, 
not gain much external visibility until the late 1920s. accompanied by greater worldwide political and 
Developments included the 1927 opening of the pres- economic interdependence. New immigrants con- 

tigious Harvard Fatigue Laboratory, which focused on tinued to arrive in the United States—especially 
research in exercise physiology, and the 1930 launch from Asia and Latin America. Meanwhile, progress 

of Research Quarterly, a scholarly journal devoted to was made toward the American democratic ideal of 

physical activity. The journal featured topics such as equal opportunity and social justice. Specifically, 

the following examples from a 1934 issue: “physiol- federal civil rights legislation mandated greater 

ogy of respiration, reflex/reaction time, measurement equality in education, business, and housing; in 

of motor ability, effects of temperature on muscular addition, racial integration also increased in profes- 

activity, and test construction” (Park, 1980, p. 5). sional and intercollegiate sport. Nevertheless, com- 

Physical educators often did research applicable plete achievement of this goal remained elusive, as 

to teaching because of the importance of teacher evidenced by the many social justice protests that 

training in college and university physical education occurred in the 2010s. 

departments. For instance, studies of techniques for The period was also affected by war and the 

assessing motor skills could be used to help teachers prospect of war. The sometimes-frightening Cold 

develop ways to evaluate student progress. War between communist and capitalist countries 
shaped worldwide reality for more than 40 years. 
Along the way, it stimulated interest and invest- 

JG 0g) ee ments in science and technology for the purpose 
of national defense. The Cold War also included 

Research on physical activity started to expand in the 
hot, disruptive episodes in the form of the Korean 

late 1920s. Many physical educators studied topics 
War (1950 to 1953) and the Vietnam War (1955 to 

relevant to teaching physical education, while some 
1975). When Soviet communism unraveled after the 

continued to examine other biophysical aspects of 
fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, vast global changes 

physical activity. took place in political and economic relations. 
uO eee e——— 



ma 100 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Conflicts continued to erupt in the latter part of with a failure rate of less than 10 percent among 

this period. In the early 1990s, Iraq invaded Kuwait, children from European countries. Moreover, after 

and the United States and many allies responded President Dwight D. Eisenhower’s heart attack in 

by driving the Iraqi armed forces back and then the mid-1950s, many people knew that his doctor 

imposing a decade-long air blockade of Iraq. Also prescribed exercise for recovery, which was a rad- 

in the 1990s, ethnic conflict between Muslims and ical idea at the time. In the early 1960s, President 

Christians led to civil war in the Balkan countries John F. Kennedy continuously demonstrated an 
of the former Yugoslavia, and the city of Sarajevo, active lifestyle through his participation in touch 

site of the 1984 Winter Olympic Games, was exten- football, tennis, swimming, sailing, horseback 

sively damaged. The September 11, 2001, attack riding, badminton, and general exercise (Rader, 
on the World Trade Center in New York City led 1990). 

to more than a decade of war in Afghanistan and In the 1970s, adult participation increased sub- 
Iraq. Throughout the 2010s, several Middle Eastern stantially in various activities, including running, 
nations experienced revolts by ordinary citizens tennis, racquetball, and aerobic dance. The number 
that overthrew long-standing dictators. However, of marathon races also increased in the United 
tribal and religious sectarian hostilities in most of States, rising from fewer than 25 in 1970 to some 
these nations have led to continuing conflict and 1,100 in 2015 (Eitzen & Sage, 1997; Running USA, 

widespread displacement of refugees seeking relief 2015). The number of recreational runners com- 
from war. These citizen movements were organized pleting shorter road races also grew, increasing 
in part through modern electronic communication from 5 million in 1990 to more than 19 million in 
via email, mobile texting, and social media mes- 2013, before experiencing a slow decline over the 
sages; those same technologies, however, have following 5 years (Running USA, 2019). 
also been used by terrorist organizations to spread Similarly, by one estimate, the number of com- 
mayhem worldwide. mercial health clubs increased from 350 in 1968 to 

Finally, the COVID-19 pandemic dramatically more than 7,000 in 1986 (Rader, 1990). Moreover, 
altered sport consumption, recreational activities, adult membership in health, racket, and sport clubs 
and elite competition. The SARS-CoV-2 virus first has grown exponentially. Between 1987 and 1996, 
surfaced in late 2019 and quickly spread around membership grew by a whopping 50 percent, rising 
the world. The World Health Organization declared from about 14 million to about 21 million (Carey 
COVID-19 a global pandemic on March 11, 2020. & Mullins, 1997). Likewise, one industry survey 
As infections and deaths rose rapidly, many global reported a 37.1 percent increase in the number 
leaders limited travel, restricted public gatherings, of U.S. health club members, from 45.6 million in 
and instituted lockdowns. Sport leaders suspended 2008 to 62.4 million in 2018 Cinternational Health, 
seasons, canceled tournaments, and conducted Racquet, and Sportsclub Association, 2019). 
championships without spectators. In perhaps More generally, according to studies published 
one of the most significant postponements, the in the late 1980s, the proportion of children and 
International Olympic Committee and Japanese adults who said that they did something daily to 
organizers pushed the 2020 Tokyo Olympics to keep physically fit increased from 24 percent in 
2021. Such measures reduced opportunities for 1961 to 59 percent in 1984; conversely, adults who 
physical activity and sport participation at both said that they had a sedentary lifestyle decreased 
elite and recreational levels (Krieger et al., 2021). from 41 percent in 1971 to 27 percent in 1985 (Blair 

et al., 1987; Ramlow et al., 1987; Stephens, 1987). 
Participation in Physical Activity However, more recent surveys conducted by the 
Since the 1950s, health-related exercise has Centers for Disease Control and Prevention—which 
increased dramatically among some adults in the used more precise criteria for vigorous physical 
United States. This trend has derived from a number exercise—indicate that in 2018, only slightly more 
of events. For one, the Korean War underscored than 50 percent of U.S. adults were engaging in 
the importance of physical fitness for military the amount of aerobic activity recommended by 
preparedness, and the continuing threat of com- 2008 federal guidelines. Moreover, engagement in 
munism was highlighted by the Soviet Union’s vigorous physical activity in leisure time was sig- 
1957 launch of Sputnik—the first earth satellite. In nificantly lower for females, racial minorities, and 
addition, a highly publicized 1953 report revealed rural populations. In addition, adults in families 
that more than 50 percent of U.S. children could with incomes above the poverty level were more 
not pass a strength and flexibility test, as compared likely to engage in regular leisure-time physical 



Chapter 4| History of Physical Activity 101 

How might a sport historian determine what led to an increase in participation in Little League Baseball? How might 
one track changes in participation in other sports and recreational physical activities? 

Elsa/Getty Images 

activity than were adults under the poverty thresh- . more than doubled” between 2000 and 2011 
old (National Center for Health Statistics, 2018). (Futterman, 2011). According to US Lacrosse, over 

Between 1950 and 2018, the number of young 300,000 high school athletes played the sport in 
people worldwide competing in Little League 2018 (US Lacrosse, 2018). 
Baseball significantly increased from about 18,000 Since 2010, however, various studies have shown 
to 2.4 million (Little League, 2018). However, from a decline in overall participation in youth sport. 
2000 to 2009, the number of children and youth One study showed that among 6- to 17-year-olds, 
participating in baseball worldwide fell 25 percent the average number of team sports played per 
(Futterman, 2011). As this overall trend has con- participant fell 6 percent from 2010 to 2015, drop- 
tinued within the United States, some neighboring ping from 2.14 to 2.01 (King, 2015). The National 
communities have resorted to merging their leagues Federation of High School Sports found high school 
in order to field enough teams, and teams often students’ participation declined in 2018-2019 for 
struggle to fill their rosters at various levels of youth the first time in 30 years (National Federation of 
baseball (Fisher, 2015). This decrease may be due in State High School Associations, 2019). Factors 

part to increased participation in other youth sport often cited for this decrease include athlete burn- 
programs, such as basketball, American football, out, increased pressure to specialize in one sport, 

soccer, and lacrosse. Participation in youth tackle expense, travel to distant events and tournaments, 
football increased 21 percent between 2000 and and, in some sports, fear of concussion. 

2009, before declining from 2.5 million participants Elite athletic competition for girls and women 
to 1.9 million in 2019 (Pielke, 2020). Some studies reappeared in high schools and colleges begin- 

have suggested that “more people now play soccer ning in the late 1950s. In 1972, the U.S. Congress 

in the U.S. than baseball, and lacrosse participation approved Title IX of the Education Amendments 



mag 102 Introduction to Kinesiology 

of 1972, requiring equal opportunity for males fallen to 8.4 percent, although the number of Black 

and females in educational programs, including front office personnel, coaches, and managers had 

athletic programs. In its wake, participation in slightly increased (Lapchick, 2019). In fact, the 

athletic competition by high school girls increased number of Black MLB coaches increased to 10.6 

almost 11-fold between 1971 and 2007. Moreover, percent in 2015 but had fallen to 7.5 percent by 

in the 2018-2019 school year, more than 3.4 mil- 2018 (Lapchick, 2019). 
lion girls participated in high school sport in the Many observers agree that the recent decline in 

United States (National Federation of State High baseball participation by Black youth has resulted 
School Associations, 2019). A similarly dramatic from the growing attraction of football and basket- 
increase occurred in the number of female play- ball. To counteract this trend, Major League Base- 
ers at colleges and universities; for example, in ball has begun sponsoring youth baseball programs 
the 2014-2015 academic year, more than 210,000 in many U.S. inner cities. These programs have 
women participated in intercollegiate sport in the begun to show great promise, and in the 2015 Major 
three divisions of the National Collegiate Athletic League Baseball draft, 9 of the 36 players picked in 
Association (2018). However, because some NCAA the first round (25 percent) were Black—the largest 
institutions opted to cut men’s programs to help total since 1992. As for other minority groups, in 
with Title IX compliance, many people blamed the 2018, Latino athletes constituted nearly 30 percent 
law for discriminating against male athletes. While of Major League Baseball players; in contrast, the 
it is true that colleges and universities eliminated number of Asian major leaguers increased steadily 
2,748 men’s teams between 1988 and 2011, it is during the first decade of the 21st century to 2.1 
also important to note that schools added 3,727 percent in 2013 but dropped to 1.5 percent in 2018 
male squads over the same time period, a net of (Lapchick, 2019). 
almost 1,000 teams. In addition, the number of Increased participation in grassroots and high- 
male college athletes actually increased after the level sport, in combination with systematic training 
implementation of Title IX, from 170,384 in 1971- and improvements in equipment and facilities, has 
1972 to 278,614 in 2017-2018 (National Coalition led to a steady increase in performance levels since 
for Women & Girls in Education, 2012; National the middle of the 20th century in most, if not all, 
Collegiate Athletic Association, 2018). Despite Olympic sports. Also, as professionalism has been 
public backlash against Title IX, scholars suggest introduced into Olympic sports, the ability of ath- 
the problem is not the law itself but how athletic letes to train on a full-time basis has undoubtedly 
departments choose to balance their budgets. Many contributed to this constant breaking of records 
athletic departments prioritize men’s basketball and improved performances in team sports for 
and football, revenue-producing sports, over all both women and men. 
other activities. Indeed, in 2015-2016 Division I One study has suggested that because “the per- 
institutions spent an average of 74 percent of their formances of athletes are the product of genetic 
men’s budgets on basketball and football; Division endowment, hard work, and, increasingly, the 
II schools with football spent an average of 65 contribution of science,” the mere willingness to 
percent of their men’s budgets on basketball and work harder is no longer sufficient to break world 
football (National Collegiate Athletic Association, records. They conclude: “Future limits to athletic 
2017). Thus although institutions and fans often- performance will be determined less and less by 
times blame Title IX, the reasons for eliminating the innate physiology of the athlete, and more and 
men’s programs are more nuanced and complex. more by scientific and technological advances and 

As girls and women made strides in sport, Black by the still-evolving judgment on where to draw the 
athletes trickled back into elite professional athlet- line between what is ‘natural’ and what is artificially 
ics. In the 1960s, this trickle grew into a fast-moving enhanced” (Lippiet al., 2008, p. 14). 
stream. In the late 1950s, Black athletes constituted Beginning in the 1960s, participation in out- 
about 10 percent of the players in professional door recreation began a steady increase that has 
baseball, basketball, and American football. By continued into the 21st century. For instance, bike 
1994, nearly 80 percent of professional basketball path mileage in the United States went from almost 
players were Black, along with 65 percent of pro- none in 1965 to more than 15,000 miles (24,000 
fessional football players and nearly 20 percent of kilometers) in 1974 (Wilson, 1977). By 2016, the 
professional baseball players (Eitzen & Sage, 1997; Adventure Cycling Association’s Routes and Map- 
Leonard, 1998). By 2018, however, the proportion ping Department had linked some “45,999 miles of 
of Black ballplayers in Major League Baseball had rural roads to create low-traffic bike routes through 



Chapter 4 |H istory of Physical Activity 103 

Subdisciplinary Highlight 
Racial Barriers and Swimming 

Despite the prominence of Black athletes in many U.S. sports, they remain underrepresented in 
swimming. For example, only 1.7 percent of U.S. competitive swim club members identified as 
African American in 2009. Sport scholar Jaime Schultz's 2019 research shows how historical 
forces and racialized beliefs created this situation. Nineteenth century scientists tried to identify 
biological differences between the races. They measured the length, thickness, and weight of 
bones as one way to “scientifically” support prevailing beliefs about White superiority in society. 
Their flawed findings posited that Black bodies possessed thicker bones, which suggested an 
imperviousness to pain and low intelligence. As Schultz shows, the results did not demonstrate 
scientific validity, but they aligned with White society’s mistreatment of Black people. 

Beliefs about denser bones led to assumptions about swimming ability. A “buoyancy myth” 
accelerated in the post-World War II era. This false notion suggests that Black people are bio- 
logically ill-equipped in the water because of their heavier bones. According to Schultz, after the 
desegregation of public schools and swimming pools in the mid-20th century, physical educators 
noticed racialized disparities in swimming ability. Rather than attribute the differences to social 
factors (for example, newly permissible access to the water), sport scientists sought biological 
explanations. They reshaped the bone-centric theories of the 19th century and again suggested 
that Black bones were heavier and denser than White bones, justifying the exclusion of Black 
athletes from swimming. Today we know that this application of sport science to swimming was 
misguided, but the buoyancy myth has had costly and long-lasting repercussions. The drowning 
rate for Black children is more than three times higher than it is for White children. For more, see 
Schultz, J. (2019). Racialized osteology and athletic aptitude, or “Black” bones as red herrings. 
Journal of Sport History 46(3): 325-346. 

some of the nation’s most scenic and historically order: running, jogging, and trail running (40.5 mil- 
significant terrain”; this network, known as the lion); hiking (35.7 million); fishing (35.3 million); 
TransAmerica Trail, was begun in 1976 (Adventure bicycling (32.3 million); and camping (28 million). 
Cycling Association, 2016). Another indication of However, the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 and 
growing interest in outdoor activity lies in the fact 2021 stymied many forms of physical activity. The 
that total U.S. National Park recreational visits closing of fitness facilities and parks, the shuttering 
increased from about 169.4 million in fiscal year of sport leagues, mandated stay-at-home orders, 
1979 to 327.5 million in 2019 (National Park Ser- and physical distancing requirements caused a 
wice, 197982019): decline in the number of people who regularly 

In the second decade of the 21st century, par- engaged in physical activities in 2020. Studies 
ticipation in outdoor recreation activities contin- show a decline across the board, with decreases 

ued at a high level. In a 2019 report, the Outdoor in walking (Tison et al., 2020), sports participation 
Foundation “ found that “a little more than half of (Schnitzer et al., 2020), and outdoor recreation 

the U.S. population participated in outdoor recre- (Landrey et al., 2020). For example, a 2020 study 
ation at least once” in 2018 (p. 1). Female outdoor on changes in recreational behaviors of outdoor 
participation rates increased for the third year in enthusiasts in the United States found that people’s 

a row, and Hispanic participation growth was the average frequency of outdoor recreation per week 

largest among a specific ethnic group. The five decreased, especially among those living in urban 

most popular outdoor recreation activities among areas with the most stringent restrictions (Rice et 

people ages 6 through 24 were running, jogging, al., 2020). That said, other reports suggest that the 

and trail running (17.3 million participants); bicy- shutdown of indoor recreation facilities, such as 

cling (road, mountain, BMX; 15.7 million); fishing fitness centers and gyms, encouraged people to 

(freshwater, saltwater, fly; 14.1 million); camping attempt new forms of physical activity outside. For 

(car, RV, backyard; 13.7 million); and hiking (12.2 example, in South Korea, the number of people 

million). The same five categories were most popu- who used the Public Bicycle Sharing System 

lar among adults over 25 but in a slightly different during the pandemic doubled when compared 



ag 104 Introduction to Kinesiology 

to the same period the previous year (Park et al., sional sports returned to action, it was with new 

2020). The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on COVID-19 protocols and limited fan attendance. In 

physical activity therefore varied based on people’s the NBA’s and WNBA’s “bubbles”—isolation zones 

geographical location, governmental restrictions, that only permitted essential personnel—teams 

and aversion to risk. COVID-19 also affected sport competed in the playoffs with synthetic noise and 

spectatorship as described next. no fans. The 2020 NFL season was similarly con- 

From 1950 to 2019, Americans had increased tested with minimal spectators allowed. 

their in-person attendance and television viewing Women’s sports continued to develop at the end 
of sports. For example, game attendance in Major of the 20th century. With the growth of sport for 
League Baseball quadrupled between 1950 and girls and women at the youth, high school, and 

2006 as the number of teams increased from 16 to college levels, professional team sports followed, 
30. In 2007, total MLB attendance set a record of albeit in a rather hit-and-miss fashion. In 1978, 

nearly 80 million spectators, then hovered around the Women’s Professional Basketball League was 
73 million for the next few years. In 2018, total launched with teams in eight cities; a year later, 
attendance dropped below 70 million for the first the name was changed to the Women’s Basketball 
time since 2003; it again dipped in 2019 to 68.5 League, and 12 teams finished the season. The 
million (Allentuck & Draper, 2019). The National league disbanded in 1982 due to financial prob- 
Football League expanded from 13 teams in 1950 lems linked to low attendance and lack of televi- 
to 32 teams in 1995. Regular season attendance sion coverage. In 1996, the American Basketball 
grew from 14,202,747 in 1995 to 17,788,671 in League launched, but it folded after two seasons. 
2016, although it declined each year after that. The following year, the Women’s National Basket- 
The NFL averaged 66,648 fans at home games ball Association (WNBA) played its first season. 
during the 2019 season, the lowest number since Supported financially by the NBA, the WNBA has 
2004 (Broughton & Levin, 2020). The reasons for grown in popularity over the years with significant 
this decline include concerns about concussions, sponsorship and television contracts. In addition, 
increasing ticket prices, and improvements in professional softball for women has been modestly 
television viewing options. Nevertheless, lucrative successful since the 1990s in the form of a league 
television contracts and record-setting viewership now known as National Pro Fastpitch. There are 
have enriched the NFL and confirmed its popularity. also a number of regional professional women’s 
Game attendance has also grown in the National football leagues that have achieved varying levels 
Basketball Association (NBA), rising from a total of success. 
of 1.3 million for regular-season games during the Soccer, another popular sport for women at the 
1959-1960 season to just under 22 million during high school and college levels, has had a more 
the 2018-2019 season. difficult time sustaining a professional league, in 

Although men’s soccer has arguably been the spite of the spectacular success of the U.S. Wom- 
preeminent spectator sport throughout most of the en’s National Team in World Cup and Olympic 
world over the past century, it did not gain much competition. In 1991, the United States won the 
of a foothold in the United States as a professional first Women’s World Cup with hardly anyone in the 
entertainment event until the late 1990s. The final nation noticing. After losing to China in the 1995 
rounds of the 1994 men’s World Cup were held World Cup, the Americans won the gold medal at 
on U.S. soil, and in 1996 entrepreneurs developed the 1996 Olympic Games before the largest crowd 
what has become a relatively stable men’s profes- to ever witness a soccer game on U.S. soil. In 1999, 
sional league—Major League Soccer (MLS)—field- the team again defeated China to win the World 
ing teams in the United States and Canada and Cup before 100,000 spectators at the Rose Bowl, as 
holding special allure for Latino spectators. well as a worldwide television audience numbering 

However, the restrictions implemented to in the millions. The squad has won four World Cups 
combat the spread of COVID-19 had significant (1991, 1999, 2015, and 2019) and four Olympic gold 
negative effects on sport viewership and atten- medals (1996, 2004, 2008, and 2012). 
dance. In the United States, the NBA suspended its These successes led to the creation of the 
season on March 11, 2020, with the MLS, National professional Women’s United Soccer Association 
Hockey League, and Women’s National Basketball (WUSA), which was moderately successful but fell 
Association (WNBA) following suit shortly there- into financial difficulties following the 2003 season. 
after. Several European professional leagues also Nevertheless, the league did much to promote 
postponed play, including the Champions League, women’s sport, especially soccer, in North Amer- 
Europa League, and Premier League. When profes- ica. In 2009, a new league, Women’s Professional 



Chapter 4| History of Physical Activity 

Soccer (WPS), began play, fielding seven teams SREY POLN eee rd ee ee 
during the first two seasons and six teams for the ‘ i ; fot 
2011 season. The WPS disbanded in 2012 due to ihe, MusiosT a ACE Weel SUSE IN 
inadequate financing. Later in the same year, it wa
r s
e  
placed by th p

e a
 N n

a t
t s
i  
o a
n n
al d
 Wo  

m gS
e  
n S
’ ye
s c
 Soc t

c a
e t
r n
 Le l

a s
g —
u  
e t
, o
 )g 

a e
nd n
 ex i

er e
ci  
se a
s l
 inc r

r a
e y
a  
s O
e l
d  
 in t s

h p
e o
 s r

e t
c s
o  
nd half of the 20th 

run by the United States Soccer Federation. century. 

Current Ethical Discussion: Sex Verification in Elite Sport 

Although most sporting activities are divided into men’s and women’s categories, separating par- 
ticipants has not always been easy. The way sport officials determine who is allowed to compete 
in women’s sport has changed throughout history. During the Cold War, sport leaders introduced 
mandatory sex testing to prove that female athletes were indeed women. The International Associ- 
ation of Athletics Federation (IAAF), the governing body of international track and field, implemented 
the first mandatory on-site policy in 1966, which involved a physical exam. Athletes dubbed this 
the “nude parade.” The IAAF and Olympic officials adopted a chromosome check shortly thereafter, 
which meant that only women with XX chromosomes could participate. Sport leaders instituted 
sex testing to detect male imposters; however, no man dressed as a woman was ever identified. 
Instead, sex testing most frequently barred women with androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS). 
Female athletes with AIS were identified female at birth, identified as female, and displayed female 
secondary sex characteristics, but—oftentimes unbeknownst to them until they underwent sex 
testing in sport—had XY chromosomes, a composition typical of male assignment (Schultz, 2014). 

Medical practitioners opposed sex testing from the beginning. For example, five Danish physi- 
cians wrote the Olympic governors in 1972 and concluded that it was “irresponsible from a medical 
point of view, and unethical.” As another example, in 1994, the Norwegian government declared 
sex testing “illegal and unethical.” Due to the protests, Olympic officials halted compulsory testing 
in 1999 (Pieper, 2016). 

However, after a brief hiatus, sport governors reinstituted sex verification, albeit in a different form. 
Contemporary regulations focus on hormone levels and affect women with naturally elevated levels of 
testosterone. The IAAF’s 2018 “Eligibility Regulations for the Female Classification” focuses on female 
athletes with Differences of Sexual Development, who have higher-than-average testosterone levels 
and compete in events from 400 meters to one mile. They must reduce their testosterone levels for 
competition, either by surgical intervention or by medication (IAAF, 2018). South African runner Caster 
Semenya appealed to the Court of Arbitration of Sport (CAS), arguing that her “genetic gift should be 
celebrated, not discriminated against.” The CAS ruled against her in 2019, reasoning that “such discrim- 
ination is a necessary, reasonable and proportionate means of achieving the IAAF’s aim of preserving 
the integrity of female athletics” (CAS, 2019). As of this writing, the IAAF’s regulations remain in place. 

Despite the CAS ruling, many people are concerned that the IAAF’s policy is unfair, discriminatory, and 
unethical. Several organizations have suggested the regulations breach medical ethics. For example, 
in 2019, the World Medical Association told doctors to disregard the IAAF’s policy because to follow it 
would violate medical ethics. The organization concluded that “Medical treatment for the sole purpose 
of altering the performance in sport is not permissible.” Others have pointed to human rights violations. 
In July 2018, Human Rights Watch, an international, nongovernmental organization, said that “the 
IAAF regulations encourage violations of internationally-protected human rights.” Similarly, the United 
Nations Human Rights Council called upon member states to refrain from enforcing any policies that 

require medical intervention to participate in women’s sporting events. 

The history of physical activity features long-standing, deeply rooted concerns about women’s 

participation in sport that eventually resulted in sex verification practices. Female athletes chal- 

lenged traditional ideas about women’s supposed weakness and frailty. Because they jumped 

high, threw far, and ran fast, they had their womanhood questioned. Knowing this history helps us 

understand some of the reasons why sport officials continue sex verification today. See chapter 3 

on the philosophy of physical activity for additional perspective on this important debate between 

opportunity and fair competition. 



Gy 106 Introduction to Kinesiology 

By the early 1960s, Roone Arledge, head of to interact and train more realistically with avatars 

sports programming at the ABC television network, than virtual conference calls permit (Kiuchi et al., 

was incorporating the highly innovative and popu- 2021). Likewise, with prohibitions on spectators, 

lar instant-replay technique into sport broadcasts. many middle and high schools livestreamed games 

In 1970, he unveiled additional novel production so parents could watch their children. Future 

technologies—such as close-ups of players and historians of physical activity will undoubtedly 

fans, multiple cameras, and directional micro- explore the many ways in which the COVID-19 

phones—with the inauguration of ABC’s Monday pandemic encouraged people to move physical 

Night Football (Gorn & Goldstein, 1993). These activities online. 
innovations made televised sport much more excit- 
ing to watch and drew new viewers. More generally, Physical Activity Professions 
the arrival of all-sport cable channels, beginning At midcentury, most U.S. college students who 
with ESPN in the late 1970s, wedded sport and majored in physical education—the name used 
television in a 24-7 relationship. The commercial almost universally at the time—became elemen- 
success of sport on television—primarily men’s tary and high school teachers; some also coached. 
team sports—provided vast amounts of money for Things began to change in the mid-1960s with 
professional and major intercollegiate athletics. the development of kinesiology. It soon became 

The 1990s, of course, also brought the begin- apparent that many careers other than teaching 
nings of the Internet revolution. By 2007, anyone and coaching also centered on physical activity and 
with a computer attached to high-speed Internet fitness (they are explored in part III of this text). 
service had instantaneous access to worldwide live As interest in exercise and physical fitness grew 
video broadcasts of sport events, as well as news in the United States, physical activity programs 
and discussions about sport through electronic chat began to be offered by health clubs, cardiopul- 
rooms and websites. Within a few years, the addi- monary rehabilitation programs, worksite health 
tion of smartphones, wireless tablets, and streaming promotion programs, and health maintenance orga- 
services allowed fans to view events in nearly any nizations. As a result, people with specialized train- 
sport. The growing number of social media plat- ing in exercise began working in a variety of jobs, 
forms like Snapchat, TikTok, and Twitter provided such as cardiopulmonary rehabilitation, personal 
athletes with new methods of self-promotion and training, aerobics instruction, and strength training. 
fostered greater fan interest and interaction. Fitness professions developed and grew in number 

Various uses of digital technology increased throughout the 1980s. Some fitness professionals 
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Elite and recre- advanced rapidly into management roles and 
ational athletes alike embraced different virtual business ownership. For example, Jack LaLanne 
platforms to remain active and engaged during opened the United States’ first health and fitness 
periods of lockdown. For example, many instruc- club in 1936. He not only encouraged exercise 
tors for Les Mills International, a global provider for both men and women, but he also introduced 
of standardized exercise workouts set to music, weightlifting and nutrition to the American public. 
reported moving face-to-face classes online to help His television show, The Jack LaLanne Show, which 
people stay fit and maintain a sense of community, ran from 1951 to 1985, was the longest-running 
while abiding by national restrictions (Andersson, exercise program in the United States. 
2021). As another example, when the MLS canceled To support the increasing number of specialists 
its games in March 2020, the Professional Referee working to prevent and treat athletic injuries, the 
Organization adopted VirBELA, a 3-D virtual reality National Athletic Trainers’ Association (NATA) was 
platform, for its training. VirBELA allowed referees founded in 1950. The membership consisted almost 

Changing Attitudes Toward Exercise Among Adults 

In the mid- to late 1950s, most Americans considered regular participation in exercise and sport 
to be the exclusive province of young people in high school, college, or professional sport. Today, 
large numbers of people pursue such activities throughout much of their lives. What historical 
events and societal changes have influenced this shift in attitude and practice? What have you 
seen of this shift in your own family or circle of acquaintances? 



Chapter 4| History of Physical Activity 107 

entirely of men until 1972, when Title LX (which degree programs or in older, hospital-based cer- 
required equal opportunity for males and females tificate programs designed for people who had 
in educational settings) became law, thus encour- completed bachelor’s degrees in other fields. By 
aging women to enter the field in greater numbers. the late 20th century, hospital-based programs 
As of 2015, there were 395 NATA-accredited degree were phased out, undergraduate programs were 
programs, including both master’s and bachelor’s in decline, and master’s programs were on the 
programs. By 2023, professional education needed rise. Consider the following comparison: In 1981, 
to sit for national certification in athletic train- accredited physical therapy curriculums included 
ing will require a master’s degree from a CAATE 100 undergraduate degree programs, 7 certificate 
accredited program (Commission on Accreditation programs, and 8 master’s programs (U.S. Bureau of 
of Athletic Training Education, 2014-2015). Labor Statistics, 1982); in the 2019-2020 academic 

At midcentury, little was offered in the way of year, there were 246 accredited physical therapy 
standard educational preparation for most careers programs in the United States. 
in sport management and leadership. As the sport Today, master’s programs in physical therapy are 
industry grew, however, more jobs became avail- not offered to new students in the United States. As 
able in sport settings, and the range of jobs wid- of 2014, “Professional (entry-level) physical thera- 
ened. Job opportunities arose, for example, with pist education programs in the United States only 
intercollegiate athletic departments, professional offer the Doctor of Physical Therapy (DPT) degree 
sport teams, city stadiums, and participant-oriented to all new students who enroll” (American Physical 
nonprofit organizations, such as YMCAs and Boys & Therapy Association, 2016). Raising the degree 
Girls Clubs. Some of these jobs didn’t even require requirements from bachelor to master’s to doctoral 
a college degree (e.g., YMCA program leader, has been a central part of the profession’s effort to 
Minor League Baseball ticket seller), whereas accommodate the increase in subject matter and 
others required an advanced degree or extensive the expanded role of the physical therapist in the 
high-level leadership experience (e.g., city stadium moderii world of health care. 
manager, big-time intercollegiate athletic director). As with participation in physical activity, 

This unevenness made it difficult to accredit the COVID-19 pandemic changed many of the 
degree programs or certify practitioners. In 1987, approaches used by physical activity professionals. 
however, curriculum guidelines were published Fitness instructors, personal trainers, and strength 
for bachelor’s and master’s degree programs in coaches had to adapt to the limitations imposed by 
sport management in a joint effort by the North the government to prevent the spread of the virus. 
American Society for Sport Management and the When lockdown measures closed fitness facilities 
National Association for Sport and Physical Educa- and gyms, many instructors moved classes and 
tion (NASPE) (affiliated with the American Alliance workouts to online platforms. Other owners main- 
for Health, Physical Education, Recreation and tained face-to-face instruction, but either in socially 
Dance—the precursor to SHAPE America). In 1993, distanced ways or in outdoor spaces. Academic 
these guidelines were revised and published as instruction on the subdiscipline also shifted to vir- 
voluntary accreditation standards. In 2008, NASSM tual formats. Most educational institutions canceled 
and NASPE launched the Commission on Sport in-person teaching and required online learning. 
Management Accreditation to oversee the accred- Although physical education teachers reported 
itation of sport management programs. By 2016, many issues unique to the field, including lack 
undergraduate or graduate degrees in sport man- of space to exercise, they nevertheless designed 
agement were offered by over 500 North American creative workouts to keep their students physically 
colleges and universities (North American Society active and healthy (Jones, 2020). 

for Sport Management, 2019). 
In the 1960s, physical therapy continued to grow 

as a profession. The number of physical therapy = KEY PON ee ee eet ees eee 
jobs in the United States increased 30-fold from In the middle of the 20th century, most physical edu- 
1960 to 2018, rising from about 8,000 to 247,700 cation majors entered the same profession—physical 
(U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1961, 2020). Dra- education teaching. By the end of the century, they 
matic change also took place in the way these could choose from a wide array of physical activity 
individuals were trained. In the 1950s, physical 

careers. 
therapy students were trained in undergraduate 



ma 108 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Research and Evidence-Based Practice in Kinesiology 
Balancing Risk and Safety in Sport 

Efforts to document how athletes are affected by concussions have been made by kinesiology 

scholars in athletic training, biomechanics, and exercise physiology as well as by researchers in 

other medical fields. The resulting evidence can be used as the basis for making rule changes 

in various sports. This work is only the most recent of many attempts to retain the excitement of 

sport while making it safer for both athletes and spectators. In the early 1900s, for example, the 

“flying wedge” formation was outlawed in American football due to player deaths and permanent 

injuries. Since then, various improvements in safety equipment (e.g., helmets, pads, masks) have 

been made in various contact sports in order to provide players with better protection. Changes 

have also been made in training practices. For instance, prior to the 1960s, it was common for 

coaches to withhold water from athletes of all ages during practice sessions for fear of inducing 
abdominal cramping. Medical research has since proven that thinking to be mistaken. 

Future research will undoubtedly bring additional changes in both rules and practices as the 
search continues for balance between risk and safety in sport. Such evidence-based consideration 
of risk often conflicts with the emphasis on entertainment and spectatorship by sport officials and 
for-profit teams. Historical research about such issues can help us understand why some safety 
innovations are quickly implemented and others are resisted. 

Scholarly Knowledge About Physical Activity SeREt POlN ee  
During the final 35 years of the 20th century, Beginning in the 1960s, the discipline of kinesiology 
scholars developed new knowledge about physical grew rapidly and branched into many scholarly sub- 
activity at a feverish pace—a trend that continues disciplines. 
today. You will learn much more about this develop- 
ment in the chapters of this text that address other 
subdisciplines. Here, we focus on the big picture. In the early 1960s, politicians and educators issued 

By the 1950s, researchers had already produced calls for better quality control in teacher education 
an extensive body of knowledge about physical programs, which resulted in scrutiny and criticism 
activity and its effect on human health and per- of physical education curriculums, many of which 
formance. However, this knowledge was scattered emphasized the diffuse research noted in the previous 
across many research journals, and no one had paragraph. In response, physical education faculty 
taken the time to make it easily accessible. In 1960, began charting new directions for their discipline. 
in an attempt to remedy this situation, Warren One such person was Franklin Henry, physical 
Johnson, professor of health education and physical education professor at the University of California at 
education at the University of Maryland, published Berkeley and a top-notch scholar in exercise physiol- 
a book titled Science and Medicine of Exercise and ogy and motor learning. Henry outlined his views on 
Sports, which contained 36 essays summarizing cur- the nature of the discipline in a paper titled “Physical 
rent knowledge. Another early attempt at organiz- Education: An Academic Discipline” (1964). He envi- 
ing research knowledge appeared in the May 1960 sioned a body of knowledge about physical activity 
Research Quarterly supplement, which was edited that would draw from “such diverse fields as anatomy, 
by a team of scholars headed by Raymond Weiss physics and physiology, cultural anthropology, history 
of New York University; each paper summarized and sociology, as well as psychology” (p. 32). He also 
research concerning a different aspect of physical believed that the field should be cross-disciplinary, 
activity (Karpovich et al., 1960). binding together knowledge from various disciplines 



Chapter 4| History of Physical Activity 

to form a distinct new body of knowledge about high-quality work that is published in a wide variety 
human movement. of multidisciplinary kinesiology journals, subdisci- 

Henry’s vision of the discipline spurred rapid plinary journals, and journals in other disciplines. 
changes during the rest of the 1960s and the 1970s. 
Specifically, a nucleus of physical educators who 
were already heavily engaged in research began Wrap-Up 
pushing to make scholarship more central in History extends your memory, as it were, with fasci- 
university physical education departments. They nating, evidence-based stories about how and why 
continued their own research and trained a cadre physical activities (e.g., exercise and sport) and the 
of doctoral students who expected to be centrally field of kinesiology came to be shaped the way they 
involved in inquiry throughout their own careers. are. Knowledge of the past gives you important, 
They also communicated frequently with scholars broad understanding about the present that you can 
in other parent disciplines—including physiology, use to make better-informed personal and profes- 
medicine, psychology, and history—who were sional decisions. As demonstrated in this chapter, 
also studying physical activity. This exchange led historical knowledge is used by kinesiology practi- 
to rapid growth in the size and scope of the body tioners in a variety of ways across many specialties 
of knowledge in kinesiology. Henry’s cross-disci- and professions. Since the 1970s, history scholars 
plinary or interdisciplinary vision within kinesiol- have gone beyond earlier descriptive approaches to 
ogy departments, however, was slow to develop. put more emphasis on analytical frameworks that 

The quest for research credibility in higher edu- help answer questions about why things happened 
cation tended to make kinesiology more specialized as they did. So far, this subdiscipline has focused 
into subdisciplinary areas, reinforcing subdisciplinary mostly on sport, but since the 1980s scholars have 
research sometimes published in “parent” discipline given increasing attention to exercise. 
journals. Seven of these subdisciplines of kinesiology If you are intrigued by what you have learned 
are introduced in chapter 1 and in part II of this book. here, then you might enjoy venturing into sport 
Throughout the rest of the 20th century, scholars history textbooks, taking an introductory course 
worked to support the growing subdisciplines by in sport history, looking through the book-length 
forming many new associations and working with research studies mentioned in this chapter, or 
publishers to inaugurate a host of new research jour- exploring major journals such as Journal of Sport 
nals. In the 1980s and 1990s, the amount and quality History and International Journal of the History of 
of research continued to increase, and the subdisci- Sport. This provocative subdiscipline can give you 
plines became stronger and more identifiable (Mas- a new outlook that enriches your understanding of 
sengale & Swanson, 1997; Park, 1981, 1989). Today, physical activity as you step into the future. 
research performed in kinesiology departments is 

_MORE INFORMATION ON HISTORY OF PHYSICAL ACTIVITY 

Organizations 

American Historical Association (AHA) 

Australian Society for Sports History (ASSH) 

British Society of Sports History (BSSH) 

International Society for the History of Physical Education and Sport (SHPES) 

National Association for Kinesiology in Higher Education (NAKHE) 

North American Society for Sport History (NASSH) 

Organization of American Historians (OAH) 



a 110 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Journals 
American Historical Review (AHA) 

Journal of American History (OAH) 

Journal of Sport History (NASSH) 

International Journal of the History of Sport (IJHS) 

Olympika: The International Journal of Olympic Studies 

Quest (NAKHE) 

Sport History Review 

Sport in History (BSSH) 

Sporting Traditions (ASSH) 

SeREVIEWOQUESTIONS 3 oe  
1. List and discuss the goals of history of physical activity. 

2. List and discuss three ways in which a kinesiology practitioner might use knowledge of 
physical activity history in her or his area of specialization. 

3. Describe participation in physical activity in the United States during the following three 
periods: 

1840 to 1900 

1900 to 1950 

1950 to present 

4. Describe professional practice centered on physical activity in the United States during the 
following three periods: 

1840 to 1900 

1900 to 1950 

1950 to present 

5. Describe scholarly knowledge about physical activity during the following three periods: 

1840 to 1900 

1900 to 1950 

1950 to present 

is I KP ropel ») Go to HKPropel to complete the activities for this chapter. 



Sociology of Physical Activi 
Katherine M. Jamieson 

In this chapter, we will 

explain how research is conduct 
e examine what researchtells us about 

_ relevant to physical activity, espec 
relationsa,nd  socioec 



Suppose that you're having coffee with your roommate att he local bookstore, anda couple 
of people at the next table are having an intense conversation. You can’t help overhearing, and 

you're interested, because they’re talking about the new plan for city parks and recreation spaces. 

As a longtime resident and soon-to-graduate kinesiology major, you have enjoyed lots of fun and | 

health-related physical activity in local public spaces. It occurs to you that these public resources 

have received support from the taxes paid by your parents and, more recently, by you as well. 
While the other folks in the bookstore seem to be fearful about who the new park spaces will 
invite into their neighborhood—especially with a skateboard park included—your mind explodes 
with all kinds of kinesiology-related questions and visions. 

You begin to wonder what it would take for all residents of this city to be able to access and 
enjoy meaningful physical activity. Who are the major players that need to be consulted in order to 
reimagine the city as a place for daily, safe, enjoyable human movement? Will your own neighborhood 
community have different needs than those nearby? How can this plan meet such diverse needs? 
What types of physical activity are most popular in your community? You also begin to recognize 
the wastefulness of one-time, elite competition venues such as Olympic sites, and you wonder how 
we might build such resources in a sustain- 
able manner. Your well- 
honed mind for kinesi- 
ology keeps churning 
out ideas for this phys- 

_ icalactivity-friendly city — 
in which you wish to — 

_ work and live, and you 
call city hall to volunteer 

_ for the pa ie com- | 
mittee. 

For students and emerging professionals in the for developing knowledge and skills related to the 
field of kinesiology, it is easy to get completely sociocultural aspects of promoting physical activity. 
enamored by the amazing capacity of the human Imagine teaching a young relative to swim in the 
body. In fact, fascination with human movement same backyard pool where you and other family 
at all stages of life and skill development is what members began your own joyful and skilled engage- 
keeps many of us deeply engaged in the field. Who ments with this activity. Now, imagine teaching an 
wouldn’t want to teach a young person to swim for older adult who grew up in a community where 
the first time, guide someone through a challenging public pools were racially segregated, thus depriving 
but rewarding rehabilitative process, or co-create her of swimming experience and leaving her with a 
a health-related physical activity plan for an entire very rational fear of bodies of water. Imagine also 
community? As kinesiology professionals, we put the rehabilitation setting for another older adult who 
our skills to use in a variety of human movement serves as the sole income provider for his family and 
arenas. Moreover, though physical performance has worked in a demanding skilled trade since high 
often lies at the core of our professional engage- school. What might a health-focused leisure space 
ment, we also bear responsibility as kinesiologists look like for these community members? 

Me 112 



Chapter 5| Sociology of Physical Activity 113 

Goals of Sociology of Physical Activity 

> To look at physical activity with a penetrating gaze that goes beyond our common under- 
standing of social life 

» To identify and analyze patterns of physical activity engagement 
» To critique physical activity programs in ordert o identify service gaps and recommend changes 

for enhanced human well-being 

More generally, in light of these examples, can of intellectual tools that one can develop in order 
you begin to ponder the social codes and expec- to look at human physical activity as more than 
tations related to gender, age, race, and ability that physical—that is, as cultural too. In other words, 
may inform even the most supposedly personal of when we intellectually unpack patterns, beliefs, 
health decisions? Beyond the crucial core of phys- values, and power relations, we reveal human phys- 
ical performance, through the shared experience ical activity as a crucial organizing component of 
of human movement spaces, we come to hold all social systems. These intellectual tools include 
some beliefs or develop understandings about our an understanding of theoretical perspectives, 
social world and about the value and structure of knowledge of research methods, and the ability to 
daily life. As a kinesiology professional, you will identify and think through social problems as they 
be expected to understand the swiftly changing relate to human physical activity. 
social and cultural contours of all forms of physical Additional course work in the humanities and 
activity across the life span. social sciences will enhance your understanding of 

the principles of sociology and, more specifically, 
the sociology of physical activity. You do not have 

Why Use Sociology to know all of these disciplines in depth, but the 

of Physical Activity? more information you have, the more insight you 
will have about the social arrangements underly- 

Our social lives are made up of mutually influential ing physical activity. For example, if you know a 
social practices (everyday behaviors) and shared little about the general nature of socialization—the 
beliefs that are so commonplace that we rarely process of learning about your own society and 
think about them. Whether we’re playing soccer, how to get along in it—then you will find it easier 
coaching a basketball team, rehabilitating a broken to understand how members of a society become 
leg, cheering for a favorite sport team, or working socialized into dominant sports or into subcultures 
out at a local gym, our social practices as athletes, centered on activities such as surfing, triathlon, 
coaches, exercisers, and spectators are influenced mountain climbing, skateboarding, rugby, and 
by commonly held beliefs in our society. In turn, exercise related to social or political causes (e.g., 
it is through our social practices that we come to Race for the Cure). 
have beliefs or understandings that we share with 
others. Yet few of us spend time analyzing the 
social arrangements—social practices and shared BO Se 
beliefs—that underlie physical activity. When we do Sociology of physical activity focuses on the shared 
look more closely, though, we gain insights about 

beliefs and social practices that constitute specific 
ourselves and our culture. Giving us this closer 

forms of physical activity (e.g., sport, exercise). Thus, 
look is what sociologists of physical activity do. 

sociological information enhances the breadth of 
Although the subdiscipline of sociology of phys- 

ical activity focuses primarily on sport, increasing knowledge of a well-educated kinesiologist. 

attention is being paid to exercise and the ways 
in which people conceive of the human body. By As you get to know more about socialization, 
exploring how we, as a culture, view our bodies you will likely notice details and nuances of phys- 
and physical activity, we may come to a renewed ical activity involvement that may lead you to ask 
understanding of what it means to be human. more complex questions. For example, rather than 
Sociology of physical activity, then, involves a set 



ma 114 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Kinesiology Colleagues 

Akilah R. Carter-Francique 
Dr. Akilah R. Carter-Francique is an associate professor at San 

José State University in the Department of American Studies and 
executive director of the Institute for the Study of Sport, Society, 
and Social Change (ISSSSC). Her scholarship draws attention 
to the intersection of sport, society, and social justice including 
issues of diversity, social movements, and the dynamics of social 
change and development. Dr. Carter-Francique, a former collegiate 
athlete, employs a critical interpretivist standpoint and applies 
Black feminist thought and critical race theory to illuminate and 
address institutional marginalization experienced by Black colle- . 
giate athletes. Carter-Francique served as the 2018-2019 pres- 
ident of the North American Society for the Sociology of Sport, 
has written and presented research nationally and internationally, 
and is the co-editor of Athletic Experience at Historically Black Courtesy of S anJ osé State University. ii 
Colleges and Universities: Past, Present, and Persistence and Crit- 
ical Race Theory: Black Athletic Experiences in the United States. 

being content to think that socialization related to activity and that different forms of sport, exercise, 
participating in physical activity flows in only one and recreational activity may be assigned different 
direction—from parents to children—you might values across time and cultural groups. Recognizing 
become interested in the extent to which young- this diversity of values, a sociologically informed 
sters contribute to socializing their parents into kinesiologist might advocate for nontraditional 
participating in physical activity. play spaces, for mixed-use facilities, and perhaps 

Even your observations of professional practice for unified sport leagues as he or she collaborates 
have given you some insight into sociology of with other professionals and community members 
physical activity. Perhaps, for example, you have to create a city that is friendly to physical activity. 
noticed that there are few female athletic trainers Sociology of physical activity in kinesiology typi- 
for American football teams, that many people cally advances three main goals: to look at physical 
cannot afford to belong to a country club, that activity with a penetrating gaze; to identify and ana- 
fitness professionals often promote achievement lyze patterns of physical activity engagement; and 
of a dominant body ideal, and that top jobs in to critique physical activity programs in order to 
college and professional coaching are held mostly identify service gaps and enhance human well-be- 
by White males. All of these observations are ripe ing. The first goal is to look at physical activity with 
for sociological study, and sociologists of physical a penetrating gaze that goes beyond our common 
activity have already documented and analyzed understanding of social life. This is a habit that must 
many such realities. be developed, and acquiring it involves exercising 

Let’s look again at our opening scenario and a bit of skepticism about common assumptions. 
consider how a well-educated kinesiologist who If you remember that the complex workings of 
is versed in sociology of physical activity might social life are usually not readily observable, then 
help plan a physical-activity-friendly event, facility, it will be easier to form the habit of looking fur- 
or city program. Kinesiologists with a background ther into your own physical activity experiences, 
in sociology are aware of dominant values and knowledge, and professional practice. For example, 
ideas in competitive, leisure, and educative models on the surface, it appears that sport and exercise 
of sport, as well as issues of access and control, are personal choices available to all members of 
especially in public settings for physical activity. society, but a closer look reveals that our physical 
Well-informed kinesiologists also recognize that activity choices are influenced by a host of social 
varied social and cultural contexts exist for physical conditions. 



Chapter 5| Sociology of Physical Activity 

Is your opinion of skateboarding changed when viewed with a penetrating gaze from a sociological perspective? 
What about other sports that are not considered mainstream? 

Galina Barskaya/fotolia.com 

To illustrate, in the United States, becoming an ceive what some sociologists refer to as “chains of 
Olympic competitor in a sport such as figure skat- interdependence” are much better able to respond 
ing, gymnastics, or speed skating often requires to the physical activity needs of an ever-changing, 
access to a number of resources, including soci- diverse population. 
etal value for the chosen sport; development of The second goal of the subdiscipline is to 
experts and training facilities in the sport; financial identify and analyze patterns of physical activity 
commitment of the athlete and family throughout engagement. Once you start looking beneath the 
training; a formal set of rules, guidelines, and surface of social life, your goal is to identify both 
benchmarks for elite performance in the sport; changes and ongoing regularities. Returning to our 
and sufficient international interest for the sport to example of Olympic involvement, sociological anal- 
remain an Olympic event. Kinesiologists who lack yses indicate that the Olympic Games continue to 
a sociological understanding of physical activity reflect the sporting traditions of the most developed 
might misinterpret trends in Olympic participation nations. Despite Pierre de Coubertin’s desire to gen- 
as indications of natural interest or willingness erate a modern Olympic movement involving gen- 
to work hard among particular groups (e.g., men uine cross-cultural exchange, the Games continue 

more than women; Whites more than other racial to privilege large, economically advanced countries 
or ethnic groups). A kinesiologist who can per- in the form of extravagant sporting displays of 



Mm 116 Introduction to Kinesiology 

nationalist propaganda. Yet change has occurred. the third goal of sociology of physical activity: 

More women and more countries now participate to critique physical activity programs in order to 

in the Olympic Games than in earlier times (see identify service gaps and recommend changes to 

table 5.1), new sports have been added to the enhance human well-being. As you may already 
Games, professional athletes are now allowed to have guessed, sociologists view the constant stream 

compete in certain sports, and environmental issues of social interaction in any society as the most 
are often considered in planning discussions for important source of societal problems, although 
Olympic venues. For sociologists, then, the issue they don’t deny that our lives are also influenced 
is not whether you agree with the current state of by psychological and biological factors. Sociologists 
affairs of the Olympic Games; rather, it is crucial to don’t just study social interaction; they also evaluate 
identify both shifting trends and stabilizing forces it. That is, they pass judgment on its contributions 
in the physical activity experiences of members to overall human well-being and equitable social 
of society. relationships (e.g., relationships between racial 

Now that you have learned to see physical activ- and ethnic groups, men and women, or people at 
ity in new ways and can identify patterns of phys- different socioeconomic levels). Returning to our 
ical activity engagement, you are ready to engage Olympic example, sociologists have critiqued the 

Table 5.1 Number of Women’s Events and Female Athletes in Olympic Games 

eee Summer games Winter games 

# of women’s # of # of women’s # of 
events/total %women’s female %female  events/total % women’s’ female % female 

Year events events athletes athletes events events athletes athletes 

1980 50/203 24.6 eee 2 14/38 36.8 232 PRe ds 

FO84 62/224 ; 728.1 1,566 23 15/39 38.5 274 2i55 

1988 86°/237 ‘ 36.2 : porLea 26.1 18/46 39:1 301 212 

1992 —98°/257 38.1 : 2,704 «28.8 25/57 43.9 488 Palo 

1994 n/a A Ra n/a = n/a 27/61 44.3 522 30 

1996 e271 399 ae is as n/a n/a n/a n/a 
1998 N/ aoe n/a n/a: n/a 31/68 45.6 787 36:2 

2000 132°/300 44 4,069 38.2 n/a n/a n/a n/a 

2002 n/a n/a n/a = n/a 37/78 47.4 886 36.9 

2004 135°/301 44.9 4,329 40.7 n/a n/a n/a n/a 

2006 = n/a n/a n/a n/a 40/84 47.6 960 38.2 
2008 137/302 45.4 4,637 42.4 n/a n/a n/a n/a 

2010 n/a n/a n/a n/a 43/89 48.3 1,044 40.7 

2012 141°/302 46.7 4,862 44.4 n/a n/a n/a n/a 

2014 n/a n/a n/a n/a 49/98 50 SE EAG, 40.3 

2016 145/306 47.4 4,700 45 n/a n/a n/a n/a 

2018 n/a n/a n/a n/a 44/102 43.1 1,204 AAA 

“Including mixed events. 

n/a = not applicable. 

Data from International Olymple Committee, Women in the Olympic Movement (2016); E.J. Houghton, L.P Pieper, and M.M. Smith, Women in the 2018 
Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games: An Analysis of Participation, Leadership, and Media Coverage (New York, NY: Women's Sports, 2018) Foundation 



Chapter 5| Sociology of Physical Activity 

Games as an exclusionary physical activity space cultural contexts in which societal members expe- 
that privileges those who happen to come from rience physical activity. They may teach an intro- 
the best-resourced countries, teams, and families. ductory course on sociology of physical activity 

In addition, as mentioned earlier, the Olympic and offer courses on specialized topics such as the 
Games typically require host cities to use public Olympic Games, interscholastic and intercollegiate 
resources, land, and human resources to build athletics, and the ties between physical activity and 
the facilities needed to host a sporting event that phenomena such as gender relations, race relations, 
lasts only a couple of weeks. Some suggest that violence and aggression, social media, and the 
hosting such an event will create local interest mass media (e.g., radio, television and streaming 
in sport and exercise, thereby increasing rates of services, magazines, websites). 
physical activity. Sadly, no evidence has been found Sometimes sociologists of physical activity com- 
to support this claim. For kinesiologists who take bine teaching with professional service by encour- 
a sociological perspective, the limited amount of aging their students to assist in physical activity 
public good that results from mega events like the programs for neighborhoods and schools. This 
Olympic Games is problematic enough to warrant helps local communities and fosters a sense of civic 
modifying the Games to produce more beneficial responsibility in future kinesiology professionals. 
outcomes for everyone, not just those who compete Faculty service activities may also include consult- 
in or profit from the Olympics. ing with professional sport leagues on antiracist 

policies and practices. Or they may include working 
with community groups to use physical activity to 

NeS GN e help bring about community-wide change, such 

Sociology of physical activity in kinesiology looks as supporting immigrant settlement by promoting 

beneath the surface of social life to point out social culturally specific forms of physical activity, or con- 

problems and advocate for changes that can enhance sulting on city planning and priorities regarding the 
development and use of physical activity spaces. 

human well-being and promote equitable social rela- 
These examples of both service and scholarly 

tionships. 
engagement illustrate the point that sociologists 
of physical activity cannot conduct their research 

In keeping with this third goal, sociologists in a typical laboratory. Even if it were possible to 

of physical activity are not always inclined to bring an aerobic exercise class or a group of sport 

support or reinforce status quo physical activities spectators into a laboratory for study, such an 

(e.g., exercise programs, competitive sports). For approach would not work in most cases. Instead, 

example, a former Olympic athlete who becomes a it would produce an unrealistic result because 

coach might start an Olympic training center where manipulating an event usually alters the very thing 

there was none before, or a biomechanist might that one is trying to study—an aerobic exercise 

design an exercise machine that helps improve class in its regular setting, for example. For this 

elite performance. Both of these are examples of reason, sociologists usually prefer to study their 

working within the status quo—that is, working subjects in the field—for example, traveling with 

to improve performance in activities as they are professional golfers on the Ladies Professional Golf 

currently structured. In contrast, a sociologist might Association tour, observing race staff to evaluate 

advocate changing the structure itself by question- the equity of athlete services in local half marathon 

ing whether we should stage fierce competitions races, mapping out the political processes that 

between nations at all, or whether we should treat underlie the preparation of elite Canadian athletes 

the human body like a piece of machinery to be for international competition, or learning how to 

meshed with other pieces of machinery. support preferred physical activity practices among 
immigrant groups. 

As part of this desire to understand everyday life 
What Do Sociologists and physical activity engagement, sociologists of 

physical activity spend considerable time making 
of Physical Activity Do? 

contacts and gaining the confidence of the people 

Sociologists of physical activity are usually faculty and communities with whom they wish to collabo- 

members in colleges or universities whose teach- rate for the purpose of developing new knowledge. 

ing, research, and service advance a scholarly and Regardless of the field setting, the quality of such 

practical understanding of the complex social and relationships affects the quality of the research. 



ag 118 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Sport sociologists investigate why some activities seem to cater more to females than to males, or vice versa. 

© Jon Feingersh/Blend Images/Getty Images 

Therefore, sociologists of physical activity seldom educators Susan Greendorfer and Andrew Yianna- 
rely on a physical laboratory space; instead, they kis. The society held its first annual conference in 
view all physical activity settings in the world as 1980 and began publishing an academic journal, 
their laboratories. the Sociology of Sport Journal, in 1984. Both the 

society and the journal continue to serve as crucial, 
active scholarly spaces for scholars interested in 

History of Sociology the sociology of physical activity. 

of Physical Activity Since the mid-1970s the number of scholars 
working in sociology of physical activity has 

This subdiscipline is relatively young. It began to increased, as has the number of theories and 
take shape in North America in the mid-1960s with research methods used by these scholars (Dart, 
the influence of English physical educator Peter 2014). Not surprisingly, the field continues to reflect 
McIntosh’s 1963 book Sport in Society. His analy- overarching topics from the more established field 
sis of the social significance of sport encouraged of sociology; these topics include diversity, com- 
several North American scholars to channel their munity, access to resources, structures, and social 
careers toward this emerging area (Sage, 1997). In organizing systems. Some of the most provocative 
1964, the International Committee for the Sociology topics in the sociology of physical activity have 
of Sport was founded; 2 years later, it inaugurated focused on the role of sport and physical activity 
a scholarly journal, the International Review for in both addressing and reinforcing social inequi- 
the Sociology of Sport, which was joined in 1977 ties—especially inequities connected with gender, 
by the Journal of Sport and Social Issues. In 1978, race, ethnicity, wealth, sexuality, and world cultures. 
the North American Society for the Sociology of Research interests have also included globalization 
Sport was formed under the leadership of physical and regional and national differences, exercise and 



Chapter 5| Sociology of Physical Activity 

societal conceptions of the human body, disability so-called developed nations to other locales (see 
and ability, and body size. Darnell, 2010). 

Over the years, sociology of physical activity has There has also been a renewed interest in coach- 
developed as an “interdisciplinary field that has ing, with sociologists of physical activity offering 
sought to incorporate elements from Education, important perspectives on leadership styles, col- 
Philosophy, Social Psychology, History, and Eco- lective development, and community engagement 
nomics” (Dart, 2014, p. 2). The three main journals by coaches and teams (see Mills & Denison, 2018). 
in the field Unternational Review for the Sociology Perhaps the most significant shift in sport 
of Sport, Journal of Sport and Social Issues, and studies since the year 2000 has been the effort to 
Sociology of Sport Journal) have produced a broad find new ways to study sport and physical activity 
array of knowledge in this diverse field of study. in social media platforms. Sport events are now 
The word cloud expression in figure 5.1 illustrates being constantly broadcast, translated, culturally 
the peer-reviewed article titles published in these interpreted, and simply seen and known all over 
three journals in 2020, with the text size reflecting the world—instantly—thanks to social media. For 
the number of articles focused on that topic. This social scientists, this phenomenon of social media 
illustration indicates a broad array of topics that engagement is like opening a new wing to our 
span various sport activities, genders, nations, sport field-based labs. For example, in addition to being 
roles and identities, and professional associations. able to study people’s participation in tracking their 
Particularly exciting is the fact that many questions daily steps, we can also study the social media 
remain underexplored, as indicated by the smaller communities that develop around that practice to 
text in figure 5.1. A similar examination done by create community or competition and to further 
Dart (2014) indicated that much of the scholarly entrench its meaning in our daily lives. 
work published from the early 1980s to 2011 fea- 
tured sports in the United States, Canada, and the 
United Kingdom; focused on team and spectator 
sports; probed questions of equity and represen- 
tation; and studied diverse participation activities, 
including leisure, elite performance, and fanship. 

In the current millennium (2001 and beyond), 
technology’s role in sport and leisure has garnered 
attention in sociology of physical activity. Technol- 
ogy issues relate to both the general population, 
such as tracking daily steps (see Adams, 2019), 
and elite athletes, such as tracking sleep patterns, 
as well as sport fans, such as the evolution of vir- 
tual spaces for fanship and participation in sport 
community (see Norman, Esmonde, & Szto, 2019). 
Related to the effects of technology, there are new 
questions in sport and disability studies about c ©, analysis 
bodily enhancements and performance measures. +y. 1). gender, “Yy team 

Ky & : eae ot 40072” 

For example, sociologists of physical activity may 340.12) o> v oul . 

study the use of titanium blade prosthetics by elite 
be: gunning \eisu" 

runners in either Paralympic or Olympic competi- Caree, &%  Po, ecyri tic @ <0, 
tion and related questions of sport governance and 
access to elite sport competition (see Dyer, 2015). 

17, e) ao os 
The sociological study of sport and global issues a 20, rm 9S re) 

29 & ae 
has also grown in the current millennium, with SS 4 0” examining 

Ca 

some attention focused on programs in sport for ZN Sy Soc 1Olo2,9,g;  ica) Port ers 
development and peace (SPD). This work includes engagement 
studies of sport programs that use transnational col- 

laborations to address local sport and educational 
Gea! A word cloud depiction of article titles 

development needs. The most ethical and impactful 
from the 2020 volumes of Sociology of Sport Journal, 

of these programs are those that partner with local 
International Review for the Sociology of Sport, and 

groups rather than export the sport traditions of 
Journal of Sport and Social Issues. 



a 120 introduction to Kinesiology 

Subdisciplinary Highlight 
Transnationalization of Professional Sports 

A growing body of research on the transnationalizing of U.S. sport focuses on attempts to capture 

an increasingly diverse fan base. Transnationalization is the globalization of sports culture. Both 

western and eastern sport and activity traditions are appreciated throughout the world, but there 

also are tensions in these trends. Jorge Moraga’s (2018) work explores the back and forth rela- 

tionship between Latinx audiences and ESPN Deportes, including a podcast called “One Nacion” 

that aims to reflect the transnational appeal and potential for counter-narratives in “mainstream” 

sport broadcasting. Yeomi Choi (2020a, 2020b) poses questions about the colonial and imperial 

legacies of South Korean national identity and transnational sport fanship, especially as they pro- 

duce particular antagonist framings of Korean and “American” masculinities in MLB. Choi (2020a; 

2020b) also analyzes the deployment of flexible citizenship in national sport, with non-Korean 

athletes seeking Korean citizenship in order to compete in sport on a global stage. In a turn toward 
the NBA, Moraga (2015) advances a textual analysis into the league’s Noche Latina campaign, 
highlighting its repackaging of racialized, sexist, and cultural tropes for global television audiences 
and social media users. This emergent body of research is unveiling tensions, contradictions, and 
bargains made in transnational sport, always to exploit the athlete worker, and often the fan, in 
support of some valued payoff for the league owners and their partners. 

In the years to come, sociologists of physical organizational components and layers of human 
activity will be striving to understand the experi- interaction—social scientists rely on a variety of tra- 
ences and effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on ditions and techniques. Like all research scientists, 
physical activity involvement (see Rowe, 2020). To social scientists begin by identifying meaningful 
do so, they will undoubtedly build upon the sport questions, which means current questions that 
studies research in neoliberal health initiatives, relate to the broader knowledge base and enhance 
inequities, and surveillance of minoritized com- people’s lives in some way. Some research ques- 
munities (see Nash, 2018). tions demand a narrow, standardized focus; with 

others, it is best to take a descriptive approach that 
is more nuanced and deeply contextualized. Yet 

BRE POIN eee eee See See eel ae other cases call for a mixture of these approaches 
Since the 1970s, sociologists of physical activity have in order to craft a well-informed, trustworthy 

explored increasingly wide-ranging topics, including response. 

various forms of inequality, globalization, regional and Social science questions generally fall into three 

national differences, societal conceptions of the human broad categories of knowledge production: land- 
scape, descriptive, and analytic (Jamieson & Smith, 

body, and disability and ability. 
2016). Within these categories, various techniques 
may be identified as the best way to generate 

Research Methods for Sociology data in order to craft a meaningful response to a 
social science question. These techniques typically 

of Physical Activity include surveys, interviews, thematic analysis, eth- 
nography, and societal analysis. 

Now that you know something about the subdisci- 
pline and its historical roots, you may be wondering 
how sociologists of physical activity produce new KEY PQQ ee 
knowledge. What methods do researchers use to 
answer important questions about the social side Research methods used in sociology of physical activity 

of physical activity? Because questions in social include surveys, interviews, thematic analysis, ethnog- 

science tend to be complex—often involving many raphy, and societal analysis. 



Chapter 5| Sociology of Physical Activity 121 

Surveys are audio-recorded and later transcribed; less often, 
they are also video-recorded. Researchers often ask 

Doing survey research involves using question- 
relatively open-ended questions and then probe 

naires that are either completed directly by respon- 
for details. For example, one investigator may ask 

dents or filled out by a researcher during brief, 
top athletes in high school, college, and the profes- 

highly structured interviews. Questionnaires are 
sional ranks to discuss their initial involvement in 

used to collect data from a large sample of people. 
sport, their participation over the years, and their 

The largest survey project in the country is the 
disengagement from sport. Another researcher may 

U.S. census, which is conducted every 10 years. 
ask young people about the characteristics of their 

Another kind of survey is a political poll about 
athletic heroes. 

voting preferences. Investigators have conducted 
surveys to address numerous topics related to 
physical activity, including youngsters’ opinions Thematic Analysis 
about what led them to become involved in sport, Researchers use thematic analysis, sometimes 
former collegiate athletes’ thoughts about leaving referred to as content analysis or textual analysis, to 
competition at the end of their 4 years of eligibility, investigate cultural material such as print and online 
and college athletic directors’ opinions about the articles, social media, photos, verbal and visual con- 
characteristics of successful coaches. Figure 5.2 tent of television programs and streaming services, 
shows the results of a survey regarding hours per interview data, sporting events, and sport celebrities 
week that youth spend playing sport. (Birrell & McDonald, 2000). This analytic procedure 

involves examining material and categorizing its 

Interviews content based on a strategy of thematic coding. 
For example, photos of female and male Olympic 

Researchers use interviews when they want 
athletes may be analyzed using the categories of 

broader and deeper information than they can get 
physical appearance, poses, position of the body, 

through a questionnaire or when they want infor- 
emotional displays, camera angles, and groupings 

mation about activities that would be difficult or 
of people. In doing such analysis, researchers often 

impossible to observe themselves. Because inter- 
identify several main categories or themes, as well 

views are time consuming, studies often focus on 
as subthemes. In some cases, investigators count 

a small number of people; they may be conducted 
the number of times that each theme or subtheme 

either one-on-one or in a group. One form of group 
occurs; in other cases, they focus on qualitative data, 

interviewing used increasingly in our field is focus 
such as the richness and complexity of less explicit 

group research. This method is particularly valu- 
themes. Identifying themes helps a researcher orga- 

able when the researcher wants to gain insights 
nize a large mass of data into a manageable number 

into people’s shared understandings and learn 
of categories that can be analyzed further in relation 

about how individuals are influenced by others ina 
to theories of interest. 

group situation (Gibbs, 1997). Typically, interviews 

13.6 
14) m Before COVID-19 

During COVID-19 (June 2020) 
12) = During COVID-19 (Sept. 2020) 

Free Play Virtual Practice Competition Total 

GUS Hours spent playing sport per week, ages 6-18. 
Reprinted with permission from Aspen Institute — Project Play, State of Play 2020: Pandemic Trends Report (2020). 



a 122 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Research and Evidence-Based Practice in Kinesiology 
Influencing Social Change With Studies on National Identity 

The research advanced by Dr. Courtney Szto, an assistant professor of kinesiology at Queen's 

University in Canada, has reimagined sport media studies as well as the role of the sport studies 

scholar. Dr. Szto’s work highlights a new kind of public intellectualism that not only reveals the ways 

that professional sport operates in the public sector but also extends the capacity of sport studies 

scholarship for enacting lasting social change in the cultural sphere of sport. Posing questions 

about tensions between national identity, sport, immigrant communities, and social justice, Dr. 

Szto’s work has proven that a major sport league such as the NHL can actually change a racist 
sport into one with a diverse fan base and can continue to thrive as a marker of national pride 
(Szto, 2020). Through this work, Dr. Szto’s goal has been to make space for a variety of alterna- 
tive narratives about hockey and cultural citizenship by posing questions about which citizens are 
invited to co-construct national identity. Her work has also sought to unveil how different forms 
of capital work to institutionalize racism and how generational change may be required to secure 
equal representation and access to sporting spaces. 

Ethnography of postmodernism. These theories are extremely 
complex; each one is variously supported, refuted, 

Researchers who use ethnography spend many 
and expanded on in massive collections of scholarly 

months or even years observing in a particular 
papers and books. Examples of societal analysis 

social setting. They “hang around” while ordinary 
in sociology of physical activity include a study of 

day-to-day events occur, often taking part them- 
modernization that focuses on sport in preindus- 

selves, talking with people about what’s happening, 
trial and postindustrial societies (Guttmann, 1978) 

and keeping careful field notes so that they can 
and an investigation (focused on social class) of 

remember details. Although this type of observation 
societal constraints and human freedoms in sport 

constitutes their primary source of information, 
(Gruneau, 1983). 

they may also look at local documents or use 
interviews and questionnaires. Researchers analyze 
most of the data that they collect using thematic KeEY POINTee 
analyses. Ethnography has been used to study a 
variety of sport settings, including minor league Research in sociology of physical activity involves 

ice hockey, baseball in the Dominican Republic, identifying meaningful questions and generating trust- 

women’s softball, the Olympic Games, women’s worthy data through the best-fitting research traditions 
professional golf, rodeo, and even family commit- and techniques. 
ments to a lifestyle of sport involvement. 

Societal Analysis Overview of Knowledge 
In societal analysis, the researcher’s goal is to in Sociology of Physical Activity 
examine the sweep of social life, usually from the 

Sociologists of physical activity often look at human 
perspective of a broad social theory. This method, 

movement from the standpoint of power relation- 
of course, isn’t the only one tied to theory—all 

ships or the ways in which physical activity choices 
good social research is theoretically based. The 

across the life span are influenced by external, 
theories used in societal analysis, however, are 

dominant cultural beliefs about social life, morals, 
extremely broad because they try to explain the 

valued behaviors, and so on. Power relations can 
most fundamental ways in which societies operate. 

be difficult to see in our everyday lives, but once 
Examples include Marxism (and its many deriva- 

you learn to recognize them you may begin to 
tives), modernization, structural-functionalism, fig- 

see them everywhere. You can then look more 
uration theory, various strands of feminism, various 

carefully, with a more penetrating gaze, at various 
cultural studies frameworks, and various forms 



Chapter 5 |S ociology of Physical Activity 123 

fascinating social aspects of physical activity. barrier. Both of these responses reflect a some- 
For sociologists of physical activity, it is crucial to what subtle cultural knowledge that we all share 

focus on access and control in order to understand at least to some degree. This “knowingness,” as it 
lifelong, human engagement in volitional move- is referred to by some scholars, constitutes a form 
ment. This focus, in turn, centers on understanding of power in society because it reinforces a certain 
power in the context of cultural analysis. Current way that societal members think things ought to 
understandings of power reflect the presence of be organized (e.g., males on the free weights and 
systems of power rather than focusing on power females in the expert-led fitness classes). 
as something that individuals either have or don’t With specific reference to physical activity, 
have. For example, gender operates as a system power inequalities sometimes affect our partici- 
of power or organizing system in our daily expe- pation as performers, as well as our opportunities 
riences of physical activity. for involvement in influential leadership roles such 

In fact, a dominant power structure that features as health club owner, coach, athletic director, or 
particular forms of masculinity and femininity cardiac rehabilitation program director. People with 
already exists in the physical education classroom, more access to power can usually get involved 
at the exercise facility, and on the sport field long more easily. Those with less access to power often 
before we step into those social spaces. For exam- face social conditions that make involvement and 
ple, there are no signs saying that the cardio room employment more difficult. For example, despite 
and group exercise classes are for women, but in improvements in some diversity categories, Lap- 
most fitness facilities these spaces are populated chick (2020a, p. 9) reported that the pipeline for 
by women. When a male enters these spaces, he NFL head coaches continues to privilege the hiring 
may be teased by some; he may also be celebrated of White applicants (figure 5.3). 
by others, who are happy that he broke the gender 

How does this activity and its participants fit with current cultural norms of acceptable activities for men and women? 

© Human Kinetics 



me 124 Introduction to Kinesiology 

People of Color Representation 
NFL Head Coaches 

CoHNfoeu amdcb heers  Race 
m@ Black or African American, # 
m Hispanic or Latinx, # 
= White, # 

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 

Year 

GeURY People of color representation as NFL head coaches, 2010-2020 (Lapchick, 2020a). 
Courtesy of Richard Lapchick, Director, the Institute for Diversity and Ethics in Sport, University of Central Florida. 

Such power differences are sometimes hidden, processes of creating inequitable bodily privilege? 
but often displayed, and even reinforced as natural In the remainder of this overview, we relate 
or inevitable, in movies, television programs, music, sociological analyses directly to the ability of 
and the structure of physical activities themselves. kinesiologists to promote high-quality physical 
Thus, whether we participate directly in activities activity, including sport and exercise, for all soci- 
such as sport, dance, and exercise or watch others etal members. Social inequalities are underlain by 
perform them, the activities express subtle infor- power relations, which affect people’s quality of 
mation that tends to support and reinforce status life, their chances for a better life in the future, 
quo power differences. For example, telecasts and their opportunities for engaging in physical 
that highlight the physical appearance of female activity. Accordingly, sociologists produce research 
athletes—with special focus on their clothes and that examines the influence of systems of power 
hairstyles—contribute to undermining, and thus (e.g., gender, race, social class, and sexuality) on 
trivializing, their athletic accomplishments. the everyday experiences of societal members. In 

It is crucial for kinesiologists to understand this abbreviated review of research in the sociol- 
power in society as they identify the best ways to ogy of sport and physical activity, we use three 
promote meaningful physical activity for all soci- material aspects of societal power—participation, 
etal members. In fact, Jennifer Hargreaves (2001) leadership, and cultural expression—to illuminate 
has suggested that “stories of sport are almost key findings and spaces for change within varied 
exclusively stories of those in power” (p. 8). Thus, sport and physical activity contexts. We isolate 
kinesiologists might ask, what are the hierarchies broad categories of difference in order to ensure a 
of bodies that emerge in physical education classes, strong understanding of core concepts, but we also 
rehabilitation settings, or school-based sport pro- hope to stimulate conversations about the intersec- 
grams? What social structures—such as laws, poli- tionality faced by people who navigate multiple 
cies, school curricula, expert knowledge—reinforce categories of difference in transnational sporting 
societal privilege for particular bodies? How do structures that privilege Whiteness, economic 
physical educators, athletic trainers, fitness profes- access, masculinity, heterosexuality, Christianity, 
sionals, and coaches contribute to (or resist) these and absence of disability. 



Chapter 5| Sociology of Physical Activity 

Gender Relations sport; in 2014, that figure was 1 of every 2.4. More 
recently, in 2018, the number of high school girls 

Gender differs from sex. As a system of power, 
participating in athletics has risen to more than 3.4 

gender is not an identity that one has (e.g., bio- 
million (National Federation of State High School 

logically male or female) but a set of norms or 
Associations, 2019). While the combination of com- 

expectations about how we should behave, and 
pliance with Title [IX and decreased state funding 

these factors are linked to societal understandings 
for sport has resulted in changes in the kinds of 

of sexuality and procreation. At birth, babies are 
sports offered to boys and girls, it is important to 

assigned to a sex category based on the appearance 
note the ongoing increase in participation rates 

of the genitalia (Lorber, 1994). This assignment 
of boys, especially in light of the often-misleading 

process combines with the subsequent differential 
claims made that Title [IX has decreased opportu- 

treatment of youngsters, based on different sex 
nities for boys and men in athletics. 

categories, to constitute the gendering process. 
At the college level, in the 2019-2020 academic 

Thus, genders are not natural, biological catego- 
year, women accounted for 221,212 of the total 

ries; they are socially defined, as evidenced by 
503,623 student-athletes in all NCAA divisions 

increasing recognition of gender fluidity and ways 
(National Collegiate Athletic Association, n.d.). In 

of self-identifying beyond previous binary (male 
that same academic year, the top five sports for 

or female) systems. One does not inherit a fixed 
women at the collegiate level were outdoor track, 

gender, but rather lives in a historical and cultural 
soccer, softball, basketball, and volleyball (National 

moment where gender is constantly being rene- 
Collegiate Athletic Association, n.d.). Not surpris- 

gotiated in terms of expressing a social identity 
ingly, in U.S. high schools, the top five sports for 

(Fausto-Sterling, 2000). 
girls were also track and field (outdoor), volleyball, 

In U.S. society, men typically hold more power 
basketball, soccer, and softball (fast-pitch) (National 

than do women, although this relationship can 
Federation of State High School Associations, 2019). 

change when race, social class, and sexual ori- 
While collegiate participation rates are most domi- 

entation are considered. For example, White 
nant in the five sports mentioned, the NCAA spon- 

middle-class women often exercise more societal 
sors 24 different championship sport participation 

power than do non-White working-class men. The 
options for all student-athletes, including women. 

situation has changed somewhat during the 20th 
Despite this growth, inequities across gender cat- 

century, but many inequalities remain. In the field 
egories continue to exist in all sectors of organized 

of physical activity, inequalities prevail because of 
sport. (It is likely that there are similar inequities in 

beliefs about the appropriateness of certain forms 
informal play settings, but these non-school-based 

of physical activity for recognized gender groups. 
sports have been studied less.) An expansive report, 
led by Dr. Ellen Staurowsky, identified ongoing 

Participation 
inequities across intersectional social groups, with 

In the United States, sustained and increasing women of color, trans women, immigrant women, 
rates of sport participation among girls and women with disabilities, and women with limited 
women remain a relatively recent trend that can economic resources still facing challenges to sus- 
be attributed largely to the passage of Title [X in tained sport involvement (Staurowsky et al., 2020). 
1972. This U.S. law required that women be pro- The report, which gathered data from a vast array 
vided with equitable opportunities to participate of current sources, cogently revealed that despite 
in education and sport. With Title IX in place and some improvement in gender parity in varied sport 
with careful implementation, girls’ and women’s settings, boys still outpace girls in youth sport 
participation in sport has increased dramatically opportunities (Staurowsky et al., 2020): 
over the last four decades. A longitudinal report on 
athletic participation since the passage of Title IX ¢ Boys are more likely than girls to compete 

indicated the average number of women’s collegiate in two or more sports. 

teams per school increased from 2.5 in 1970 to ¢ Each year, boys receive over one million 
8.7 in 2014 for a total of nearly 10,000 teams—the more opportunities in high school sports 
highest numbers ever (Acosta & Carpenter, 2014; than do their female peers. 
Women’s Sports Foundation, 2009). Acosta and ¢ At the college level, men had 62,000 more 
Carpenter’s report also noted that in 1971, only opportunities to participate in sport than 
1 of every 27 high school girls played a varsity did college women. 



me 126 Introduction to Kinesiology 

The landscape is even more challenging among is downplayed. For example, female sports may 

girls who are also urban residents, LGBTQ+ indi- receive fewer resources, such as travel money, 

viduals, immigrants, or from racial and ethnic coach salaries, publicity funds, media exposure, 

minority groups, all of whom often enter sport later, and corporate sponsorships. In some cases, they 

participate at lower overall rates, and leave sport are even given team mascots or nicknames that 

earlier than their peers who are White, suburban, suggest fewer physical skills, such as the Teddy 
binary-gender-conforming, and born in the United Bears, Blue Chicks, Cotton Blossoms, or Wild 

States (Staurowsky et al., 2020). Kittens (Eitzen, 2016). The success and popularity 

In North American societies, sport has tradi- of the U.S. women’s national soccer team allowed 
tionally been viewed as an important avenue for them to forcefully lobby for compensation equal 
exploring and confirming a particular form of White, to that of the U.S. men’s team. 
middle class, heterosexual masculinity. More spe- 
cifically, it has been thought to sharpen a number Leadership 
of qualities traditionally considered appropriate for Our knowledge of gender inequities in physical 
men and boys, such as toughness, aggressiveness, activity leadership pertains mainly to participation 
working well under pressure, and competitiveness. by athletes, but let us briefly examine leadership 
In reality, you probably know girls and women with in U.S. sport. We know that opportunities are 
some of these qualities—a fact that points out the increasing for U.S. women in coaching, sports- 
indistinct boundaries between these two genders. casting, and officiating but remain more limited 
While some people still consider competitiveness to than they are for men (Acosta & Carpenter, 2004; 
be a masculine trait, in sports such social influences Carpenter & Acosta, 2008; Coakley, 2009; LaVoi et 
have an effect on both male and female athletes. al., 2020). Moreover, from the 1970s into the 1990s, 

sharp decreases occurred both in the percentage 
of female coaches of female high school and inter- 

ReEY: POU ea  oe collegiate teams and in the proportion of female 
Although many more females engage in a broad range administrators heading women’s intercollegiate 

of physical activity today than they did several decades programs. For example, in the 1977-1978 academic 

ago, from K-12 to collegiate levels of competition, they year, 79 percent of the coaches of female basket- 

continue to have less access to sports that involve ball teams were women; by the 1991-1992 year, 
that number had dropped to 64 percent (Acosta & 

frequent body contact, require significant strength, or 
Carpenter, 1994). 

have limited aesthetic appeal. 
More generally, the proportion of female colle- 

giate teams led by a female head coach decreased 
If a woman or girl you know started training from 90 percent in 1972 to 43 percent in 2014. 

to be a football player, what would you think? By 2014, there were 4,154 female head coaches 

Many Americans might judge her negatively. What of women’s collegiate teams—the highest number 
makes it inappropriate? Although many females are ever and an increase of 180 over the previous 2 
now developing muscular strength and endurance years (since 2012). Sadly, this increase in the total 
through weight training, few take part in sports number of women’s head coaches did not address 
that require great strength, physical domination the drop in the proportion of all head coaches that 
of an opponent through bodily contact, or the were women. Interestingly, as of 2016, only 4.6 
manipulation of heavy objects. Only a few women percent of men’s collegiate teams were coached 
compete in mixed martial arts fighting, and only by women, whereas 60 percent of women’s teams 
one woman has scored a point as a kicker in college were coached by men (Wilson, 2017). Between 
football. One early sociological study reported that 2000 and 2014, 2,080 new head coaching jobs 
the sports we judge more appropriate for females, appeared in women’s athletics, of which about 
such as gymnastics and tennis, entail little body one-third were filled by females and two-thirds by 
contact and involve aesthetically pleasing move- males (Acosta & Carpenter, 2014). The percent of 
ments and manipulation of light objects (Metheny, head coaching positions held by women of color in 
1965). We clearly have a long way to go for greater NCAA women’s athletics (all divisions) is abysmal, 
social acceptance of female participation in more with only 7.6 percent Black female head coaches 
violent, physical domination sports and activities. and 6.1 percent “other ethnic-identified” female 

The continued emphasis on masculinity in male head coaches, while 86.2 percent of female head 
sports often means that women’s competition coaches are White (Wilson, 2017). Beyond amateur 



Chapter 5| Sociology of Physical Activity 127 

athletics, in 2019, less than 50 percent of WNBA the influential athletic leadership positions (e.g., 
head coaches were women (Lapchick, 2019). collegiate athletic directors, Olympic federation 

A similar pattern appears when we look at leaders) that exert strong control on hiring deci- 
administrative positions. For instance, the per- sions. When making decisions about hiring coaches 
centage of female administrators heading women’s or appointing people to important committees, 
U.S. intercollegiate programs plummeted from those who already hold such positions likely use 
90 percent in 1972 to 23 percent in 2014, and in their convenient and trusted network of connec- 
2016 that number was even lower, at 19.6 percent tions in athletics, often referred to as the “old boy 
(Acosta & Carpenter, 2014; Wilson, 2017). Addition- network,” to find candidates. In a survey of more 
ally, the longitudinal data showed limited gains in than 2,000 leaders in women’s sport, Staurowsky 
other leadership roles for women, who held only and colleagues (2020) found a consistent set of 
32 percent of head athletic trainer and 12 percent beliefs, based on professional experience, around 
of head sports information director roles in 2014 hiring and retaining women in sport leadership 
(Acosta & Carpenter, 2014). The NCAA reported roles. Specifically, college-level leaders in women’s 
that as of 2016, only 9 percent of female adminis- sport suggested that stereotyping, lack of female 
trators were Black, 4 percent were “other ethnic,” sport leader role models, limited opportunities for 
and 87 percent were White (Wilson, 2017). advancement, and paternalistic workplace climates 

On a global scale, Lapchick et al. (2016) found continue to negatively influence hiring and reten- 
that representation of women was abysmal in tion of women sport leaders (Staurowsky et al., 
international sport federations recognized and 2020, p. 53). Survey respondents in professional 
relied on by the International Olympic Committee and Olympic sport settings reported a similar set 
(OC). More specifically, the researchers assigned of conditions around hiring of women in sport 
a grade of D+ to the IOC and a grade of F to the leadership roles. 
collective set of national sport federations for not Two other factors have also gained attention as 
doing more to live up to their own rhetoric about potential barriers to women’s and men’s involve- 
the need for gender equality in sport leadership. In ment in collegiate coaching—namely, homophobia 
this first “report card” study of women’s leadership in collegiate athletics and incompatibility between 
in international sport settings, women accounted parenting roles and coaching roles (for men and 
for just 6 percent of international federation presi- women, but especially for women). As Lapchick 
dents, 12 percent of vice presidents, and 13 percent and colleagues (2016) have pointed out, we are all 
of executive committee members. In the IOC itself, still working toward full accountability to rhetorical 
women made up a mere 24 percent of members. calls for equity. It is not enough to assert the value 
As you consider these leadership data with par- of equality in sport; individuals and organizations 
ticipation rates among athletes in Olympic sports, must also strategize in order to recruit and retain 
it is even more clear that structural inequalities high-quality sport leaders who can bring a col- 
related to gender continue to create disproportional lective diversity of ideas, cultural knowledge, and 
opportunities for men and women to move into lived experience to the ethical governance of sport. 
global sport leadership roles. Given these challenges, kinesiologists who develop 

a sociological perspective will be well prepared to 
lead the field toward achieving such goals. 

SeNS WU BS e 
Cultural Expression 

Women occupy a relatively small proportion of coaching 
and leadership positions in sport. Given that societal gender inequalities exist and 

that all physical activities have expressive dimen- 
sions, these inequalities are often demonstrated 

Why are more men now coaching and adminis- in our physical activities. For example, in some 
tering women’s teams and programs? Researchers forms of dancing (e.g., waltz, many country-west- 
have posited a number of reasons. To begin with, ern dances), men usually move forward and lead 
in some sports the larger number of male players women, who usually move backward. This tech- 
constitutes a larger pool of qualified candidates. nique communicates a nonverbal message about 
In addition, the fact that women’s coaching sala- men’s supposed superiority. 
ries still lag behind those of men may cause some In sport, our most popular events—the ones we 
of the top female players to seek careers outside see constantly on television—celebrate a form of 
of athletics. Furthermore, men occupy most of heterosexual manhood centered on aggressiveness, 



ag 128 Introduction to Kinesiology 

roughness, and the ability to physically dominate Gender inequity is also manifested in sport 

others. In contrast, girls and women have most media. Have you ever thought about media cover- 

often been relegated to marginal positions as age of men’s and women’s sport? In a span of about 

spectators of boys’ and men’s competition or as 15 years, a steady trend has emerged in which over 

players in their own, less popular versions of these 95 percent of sport on television focuses on men’s 

and other sports. This contrast communicates a athletics, or to state the point in reverse, women’s 

message that females don’t matter much in “real” competition gets less than 5 percent (Cooky, Mess- 

sport. Moreover, when coaches criticize boys or ner, & Musto, 2015). The picture has been similar 

men for making weak or ineffective plays, they in U.S. newspapers, where women’s sport gets less 

sometimes do so by calling them sissies. Such than 15 percent of overall sports coverage (Coak- 
comments, intended to spur better performance, ley, 2009). This disparity in coverage and the often 

send a message that females are inferior. Coaches sexualized, gendered, and infantilized story frames 
communicate a similar message when they use trivialize women’s athletic accomplishments and 
gendered descriptions such as “throws like a girl.” send an underlying message that women’s events 
These examples show ways in which sport tends aren't worth much (Cooky et al., 2015). 
to reinforce ideas about the acceptability of het- 
erosexual male dominance. Racial and Ethnic Relations 

Race is a historically, culturally, and socially defined 

aS2 2000 | e category of social difference that is typically marked 
by phenotypic variance (e.g., in skin color, body 

Many sports serve as vehicles for exploring, cele- 
shape, facial features, hair type). In other words, 

brating, and privileging masculinity; in doing so, they 
race is socially defined on the basis of character- 

express ideas that are problematic for girls and women istics that we select; it is not a natural, biological 
and for boys and men who are not athletically inclined. category or difference. Like gender, then, race is not 

a fixed identity that one has but rather a shifting 
condition of social life that one experiences every 

Girls and women are not the only ones short- 
day. More generally, we live in a society that is orga- 

changed by the gendered attitudes that prevail in 
nized around arbitrary beliefs about gender, race, 

sport. In fact, mainstream society often questions 
and social class. Kinesiologists must understand 

boys and young men who lack athletic ability or are 
how to work through these social conditions and 

not interested in athletics. They may be called “sis- 
inequalities in order to make meaningful physical 

sies,” their sexual orientation may be challenged, or 
activity available to all societal members. 

they may be pushed into the “neo-nerds” category 
(Edgette & Rupp, 2012). In high school, boys’ pop- Ethnicity refers to cultural heritage. People who 

share important and distinct cultural traditions, 
ularity is often closely connected with being good 
at athletics. In the past, boys have experienced often developed over many generations, are clas- 

social ostracism and name-calling because of peer sified as an ethnic group. Ethnic markers include 

perceptions of poor athletic ability (Edgette & such things as language, dialect, religion, music, 

Rupp, 2012). Do you think this is still a common art, dance, games and sports, and style of dress. 

bias against unathletic males? With the current shift Examples of ethnic groups in the United States 

away from a binary view of gender, do you see include Latinos and Latinas, persons of Jewish 

this bias lessening in its gender aspect while still descent, Inuits, Amish, and Cajuns. In some cases, 

representing a school-wide privilege for athletic ethnicity overlaps with race. For example, persons 

students as compared to unathletic students? of African American descent are most often defined 

Masculinity and Femininity Examined 

Think about physical activities you have experienced in which questions arose about a male’s 
masculinity or a female's femininity. What do these examples suggest about our shared beliefs 
concerning appropriate activities for boys and men and for girls and women? What do they sug- 
gest about gender inequalities in these physical activities? What do they suggest about societal 
definitions of masculinity and femininity? 



Chapter 5 |S ociology of Physical Activity 

as a racial group, yet there are many distinct Afri- For example, much of our research fails to 
can cultural traditions, African nations, influences account for African Americans’ high participation 
from various Caribbean cultures, and a variety rates in a few sports and their low involvement in 
of European colonial influences that make racial most others. This situation is probably influenced 
categories limiting. by both opportunities and lack of opportunities 

Throughout history, including current times, (Sage et al., 2018). That is, African Americans tend 
racial- and ethnic-minority communities have lived to be more visible in sports with easy access to 
with contingent civic representation and rights and facilities and coaching, primarily in school and 
have typically held less civic and legal power than community recreation programs. In contrast, they 
have racial-majority communities. Typically, White are less likely to participate in sports that require 
European dominance—exercised in and through private coaching, expensive equipment, empty land 
societal structures of governance—has contributed for playing fields, or facilities at private clubs—for 
to inequalities ranging from subtle forms to overt example, tennis, golf, swimming, soccer, and gym- 
forms such as Jim Crow laws in the southern United nastics. However, it remains unclear to what extent 
States. Such inequalities have been both highly these factors influence African American athletic 
visible and powerfully resisted in various societal involvement. In addition, the sustained success of 
and cultural settings, including those related to Black athletes in historically segregated sports— 
sport. Thus, many people can recall the breaking such as Tiger Woods in golf, Venus and Serena 
of the color line in Major League Baseball, but a Williams in tennis, Bill Lester in NASCAR, Simone 
deeper look quickly reveals that Jackie Robinson’s Biles in gymnastics, and Simone Manuel in swim- 
presence also marked deep divisions in U.S. society ming—raises new questions about access, identi- 
and in its progress toward creating, in the words ties, and underlying reasons for sport involvement. 
of the U.S. Constitution, a “more perfect union.” In U.S. higher education, there is an expectation 

Although strides have been made toward equal- that equitable access will be provided to members 
ity, many difficulties remain. The field of kine- of all social groups, but a quick review of NCAA 
siology is not immune to such problems (Smith Division I representation in leadership and athlete 
& Jamieson, 2017). The focus in this section is participation reveals disproportionate involvement 
largely on sport, rather than physical education or in terms of both race and gender. For example, 
informal physical activity. However, as previously although Black males account for nearly 23.4 per- 
mentioned regarding gender disparities, it is likely cent of male Division | athletes, they make up only 
that there are inequities in informal play settings 9.1 percent of head coaches. In comparison, White 
as well, but these forms of physical activity have men are overrepresented as head coaches, holding 
been studied less. 85 percent of the Division I top spots, compared 

to just 55.6 percent of student-athletes (Lapchick, 
Participation 2020b). In women’s Division I basketball, Black 

In elite team sports, we frequently see dispro- women account for 41.9 percent of student-athletes 

portionate representation of various racial-ethnic but only 14.0 percent of head coaches, alongside 

groups, and we often interpret this pattern in cer- 5.5 percent of head coaching spots held by Black 

tain ways. The high participation rates of African men (Lapchick, 2020b). 

Americans in many professional sports probably Representation in leadership roles in U.S. colle- 

relate mostly to U.S. social structure (Sage et al., giate athletics remains overwhelmingly White and 

2018). More specifically, a history marked by male. Table 5.2 illustrates the disparate represen- 

limited outlets for people in certain racial-ethnic tation across racial groups. The category “all other 

groups to make public contributions to society has racial groups” is used here to indicate further the 

surely influenced the U.S. preoccupation with the lack of representation (as student-athletes and 

athletic capacity of non-White men and women. especially in leadership roles) across multiple racial 

This historical legacy is joined by the mass media’s groups. These data do not specify how many head 

tendency to push narratives of athletic achievement coach or athletic director roles are occupied by 

by members of minority racial-ethnic communities men or women. Readers may recall that in 2021 

as “a way out” or their “only option” or as a result head coaches Adia Barnes and Dawn Staley made 

of their “natural ability.” The combination of this history when, for the first time ever, two of the four 

legacy and these narratives limits our understand- head coaches in the women’s basketball Final Four 

ing of participation rates among racial groups were Black women (Copeland, 2021). 

across various sport and physical activity settings. 



Me 130 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Table 5.2 Gender and Racial Representation in NCAA Division | Athletics as Percentages, 2019-2020 
i

Position White Black All other racial groups 
lt a I et  
Student athlete: men : 27 14 4Be  

Student athlete: women 29 7 12 

Head coach in men’s sports 81 Gs. 6 

Head coach in women’s sports 79 alee! . 8 

Athletic director 78 16 6 

Data from NCAA.org 

Rene although many Latino players are international 
Large numbers of Black athletes play major team players, they are not counted as such; tracking the 

sports and participate in track and field, but their globalization of MLB would be an interesting and 

representation remains disproportionately low in most informative project. For more information about 

other sports and in leadership roles in sport and in the representation of various groups in specific 
sports, see table 5.3. 

U.S. society. 

Leadership 
Some of the same factors affect recreational If U.S. society were characterized by full racial 

physical activities in which competition is not equality, then we would expect to find rather high 
essential, as well as exercise programs geared proportions of African American coaches in sports 
toward improving health and appearance. These that have high proportions of African American 
types of activities—for example, surfing, backpack- players—for example, American football, basket- 
ing, exercising at a health club, swimming, and ball, and baseball. However, this is not the case. 
skiing—require various combinations of expen- A 2019 TIDES Race and Gender Complete Report 
sive equipment, facilities, lessons, and travel, thus indicated that African Americans were not repre- 
limiting involvement by people in lower-income sented at all as Major League Baseball managers, 
families. Because poverty levels in the United States and they held 9.4, 26.7, and 4.2 percent of head 
are strongly associated with race, racial-ethnic coach spots in the NFL, NBA, and MLS, respec- 
minorities may be underrepresented in more costly tively. In the same year, 25 percent of WNBA head 
physical activities (Economic Policy Institute, 2011; coach spots were held by African American men 
Wilson & Rodgers, 2016). or women (Lapchick, 2019). The 2007 Super Bowl 

In major professional sports, Black Americans was historic in this regard because it featured two 
are overrepresented in basketball (men’s and wom- African American head coaches in Tony Dungy 
en’s) and American football, are making gains in and Lovie Smith. Some credit has been given to an 
soccer, but remain underrepresented in baseball. NFL rule (the Rooney Rule) requiring that at least 
Latinos are underrepresented in all professional one minority candidate be interviewed when any 
sports, especially the WNBA, NBA, NHL, and NFL. team is searching for a new head coach. On the 
Asian women have limited but increasing repre- college level, among NCAA Division I programs in 
sentation in the WNBA, whereas Asian men make 2019, African Americans held 7.3 percent of head 
up less than 2 percent of players in MLB, have coaching positions for football, 23.6 percent for 
made gains in MLS, and are underrepresented in men’s basketball, and 19.5 percent for women’s 
the NBA and NFL. MLS is the only league to report basketball (Lapchick, 2020b). African American 
“international players” (i.e., players from outside men and women held 9.1 and 8.3 percent of head 
of the United States) representing more than half coaching spots in men’s and women’s Division I 
(55 percent) of the league. In the case of MLB, NCAA athletics, respectively, and they accounted 



Chapter 5| Sociology of Physical Activity 131 

Table 5.3 Racial Representation
o  in
e  Pro
 fession
E al 
E Spo
 rt 
EE a 

MLB, 2020 NBA, 2020 NFL, 2019 MLS, 2019 WNBA, 2019 
Racial group (%/#) (%/#) (%/#) (%/#) (%/#) 

White 60.2/539 16.9/83 26.8/444 38.3/249 17.4/25 
Black or African American TERSV ASHE 74.2/365 58.9/976 23.1/150 67.4/97 
Hispanic or Latino 29.9/268 22/11 0.5/8 33.4/217 0.7/1 
Asian 49/47 0.4/2 0.1/1 dT 1.4/2 
American Indian or Alaskan 0.2/2 0.0/0 0.2/3 — = 
Native 

Hawaiian or Pacific Islander 0:3/3 = 

Other a 6.3/31 = 42/27 13.2/19 
Two or more races 0.0/0 = 9.6/150 =: — 
Not disclosed 0.0/0 — 3.1/51 = = 
International — = = 55.4/360 ee 
Total people of color — — ~ 61.7/401 = 
Total players 896 492 1,633* 1,411* 144* 
*Player totals are estimated, as reporting categories may invite selection of more than one category. 

Data from TIDES Race and Gender Report Card series 2019/2020. 

for 8.8 percent of all Division I athletic director fundamentals, and, taking another step, speak- 
positions. Slow progress may be trending, but not ing to booster clubs.” Although Stokes expressed 
without intentional efforts to understand and dis- optimism about landing a job as a head coach, he 
mantle structural racism in its varied forms across realized that people might perceive hiring him as 
all professional leagues and collegiate settings. taking a chance (Ross, 1996, pp. C1-C2). 

Two common explanations for these leadership 
inequities have been racist stereotypes and “old 
boy networks.” Racist stereotypes that character- eKEY: PON Se ee 
ize African Americans as having inferior intellec- Few African Americans reach important sport leader- 
tual capabilities hinder their attempts to attain ship positions, even in team sports that feature many 
athletic leadership roles in which thinking and African American players. 
working under pressure are considered crucial. 
When people in charge of hiring rely on racialized 
views supported by institutional racism, African A second explanation for leadership inequities 
Americans (and other non-White racial groups) relates to networking. Athletic administrators who 

are likely to be shortchanged (Sage et al., 2018). hire people for entry-level coaching or manage- 

Ricky Stokes, an African American former assistant ment positions are likely to be White. They are 

basketball coach at Wake Forest University, put it also likely to learn about job candidates from their 

this way: “As an African American assistant coach, professional friends in other athletic programs, 

sometimes you can be labeled as a recruiter. A lot most of whom are also White. Because ethnic and 

of times people think that’s all you’re supposed racial minorities are not usually involved in these 

to do. Sometimes people don’t think you can networks, athletic administrators can easily over- 

do the job on the floor—coaching, teaching the look them. Relatively few people from marginalized 



a 132 Introduction to Kinesiology 

ethnic and racial groups hold leadership positions not understand Kaepernick’s protests, and 

in programs featuring expensive sport and exercise it cost him dearly in his profession. Sub- 

regimens (Sage et al., 2018). A quick tour of sport sequent videos of police violence during 

and activity facilities—such as health clubs, soccer arrests in 2020 and the subsequent Black 

fields, skating rinks, ski areas, gymnastics schools, Lives Matter movement, however, indicate 

and tennis courts—would probably turn up only that more people have become aware and 

a handful of coaches and administrators of color. oppose this racism. 

* Grambling State Tigers football players who 
Cultural Expression refused to take the field as a political state- 
Expressive behavior by all athletes is sometimes ment on conditions and leadership in their 
appreciated by audiences, sometimes regulated program (Zirin, 2013). 
by league rules, and sometimes encouraged by ¢ Black WNBA players and teammates wear- 
coaches as a way to intimidate one’s opponent. In ing Black Lives Matter T-shirts during warm- 
the American racial hierarchy, expressive behavior ups (Pandian, 2016). 
by racially minoritized athletes has been examined 
as a possible form of resistance to the surveillance Moving further beyond the White—Black binary 

that these athletes navigate throughout their sport of racial recognition in the United States, one might 

careers and likely non-sport aspects of life as well. consider the early retirement decision of Mexican 

Women’s professional tennis, as one example, has professional golfer Lorena Ochoa and the resistance 
had notable challenges in attracting and retaining of Indian runner Dutee Chand, which were partly 

women of color to the sport. Research indicates that refusals to accept race, gender, and sexuality ineq- 

the sport governance, fanship, and cultural venues uities in sport governance policies (The Guardian, 
reproduce a White supremacy that is at least an 2014). One might also consider a movement afoot 

added challenge for a woman of color competing in 2021 in which elite female-identified athletes 
in these racially codified spaces. have used their wealth to support women’s sport 

Sport provides a ready-made arena for read- leagues, such as tennis pro Naomi Osaka buying 
ing athlete expressiveness through a Whitened partial ownership of the North Carolina Courage, 
gaze. Examples include celebration dances in the a National Women’s Soccer League team (Wolken, 
end zone; Muhammad Ali’s boasting, poetry, and 2021). Also notable was the Atlanta Dream team 
dancing in the ring; Julius Erving’s gravity-defying members facilitating an ongoing engagement with 
moves to the basket that often began at the foul the Black Lives Matter campaign and calling for the 
line; Serena Williams dancing on the tennis court; team owner to support the campaign or step aside. 
Megan Rapinoe’s airplane arms and firm pose; Eventually, the team was sold, and former WNBA 

and the incredibly different manner of reading a star Renee Montgomery became part of the new 
Tim Tebow kneeling posture versus that of Colin ownership team (Li, 2021). 
Kaepernick. Many current sport stars continue to Such actions on the part of elite athletes have 
create images rooted in the traditions of cultural often been classified as merely media-seeking 
expressiveness across racial-ethnic communities, behavior. It is important to replace such percep- 
and these expressions find homes in sport and in tions with a more complex notion of nuanced 
the broader society, owing to the power of elite ath- refusal—refusal to be held captive by sport gov- 
letes to represent and transmit cultural knowledge. erning bodies and by a consumer culture, both of 

Beyond the often sensationalized, entertain- which have been formed around privileged White, 
ment-value framing of expressiveness among middle-class, gendered modes of expression. This 
African American male athletes, armed with a kind of analysis of athlete expression across racial 
sociological perspective, you are invited to con- groups and with intersectional attunement will turn 
sider the broader context of the following athlete our attention to the ways in which the media, sport 
expressiveness: governance, and sport leaders can intervene, along 

with athletes, in disrupting the American racial hier- 
¢ Former San Francisco 49ers’ quarterback 

archy. For sport sociologists, these athlete actions 
Colin Kaepernick taking a knee during the 

are important sites of change-oriented expression. 
national anthem in 2016 as a way to pro- 

Racial identity and community conn
test what he viewed as the oppression of ection are 

often at the core of one’s own form of spo
Black people and other non-Whites in the rt expres- 

sion, at playgrounds and school
United States. Many non-Black people did  athletic facilities. 

Expressive style is a crucial part of all sports, and 



Chapter 5| Sociology of Physical Activity 133 

Assessing the Ethnic and Racial Mix in Sport 

Think about the local physical activity programs with which you are familiar in schools and com- 
munity recreation centers—for example, physical education classes, varsity teams in high school 
and college, rhythmic aerobics classes at local YMCAs, pickup basketball games on inner-city 
courts, gymnastics instruction at private centers, and youth sport leagues formed by groups such 
as the American Youth Soccer Organization and Little League Baseball. From your observations, 
what ethnic and racial minorities are represented among the people who play leadership roles in 
these programs (e.g., supervisor, director, coach, official)? How do the proportions of ethnic and 
racial minorities in these positions compare with the proportions of ethnic and racial minorities 
among the players? What are some possible reasons for the similarities or differences in these 
proportions? 

it shows up uniquely in each sporting space. The and Richardson (2016) provide further evidence 
challenge is not to read this as a Black thing or a of both erasure of Black sporting femininity and 
Latino thing, but rather as a form of expression in attempts at controlling its framing. In addition, 
a racialized sporting space that helps us each to kinesiology has, throughout its history, amplified 
see the nuances of social inclusion and exclusion. racist beliefs around biological and cognitive dif- 

Unfortunately, sport also communicates ideas ference (Smith & Jamieson, 2017). Moreover, media 
that help maintain racial and ethnic inequities. representations of Black athletes illustrate the ways 
For example, the fact that many top athletes are that heteronormativity and whiteness are brought 
Black seems to send an upbeat message to Black together to portray BIPOC and LGBTQ+ athletes 
American boys and young men that they can make as out of bounds and risky (King, 2009). 
it to the pros if they work hard enough. However, Intersectional research shows that our under- 
this message is misleadingly positive. For example, standing of racial categories can change over time; 
although a number of Black high school varsity therefore, as consumers of sport, we need to be 
basketball and football players believe that they aware of the racialized rhetoric used to convey 
have a chance of playing professionally, only sport stories. Descriptions of athletic perfor- 
a minuscule number actually make it. Because mance that use the brains-versus-brawn trope or 
constant sport practice usually gets in the way of femme-versus-muscle moll stories are disappearing. 
acquiring other job skills, the combination of racial The phenomenon, however, continues to evolve 
inequalities and an overreliance on one’s athletic and take on new forms, as will be evident whenever 
identity may limit one’s opportunity to develop we consider how race intersects with gender, social 
a broad, professional skill set (Sage et al., 2018). class, sexuality, and ability (Douglas & Jamieson, 
White youths in higher socioeconomic brackets 2006; Eitzen, 2016; Sage et al., 2018). 
who dream of playing professional sports usually 
end up short of their goal as well, but because 
they don’t face racial discrimination and may have > KEYCP ON eee eee ee 
economic resources in families with contacts with Most athletes express themselves in ways that assert 
more potential employers, they are often better deep confidence. BIPOC athletes who express creativity, 
positioned to pursue other job opportunities. strength, and pride in ways associated with non-White 

cultural practices, however, often get characterized by 
Racial Stereotyping 

media members in racially stereotyped ways. These 
Racist stereotypes have often been used in media stereotypes further reveal the systemic racism found 
commentary and reporting of White and Black 

in many sport institutions. 
athletes (Cahn, 2015; Carter-Francique & Richard- 
son, 2016; King, 2009). Historical analyses such 

as that of Susan Cahn (2015) illustrate a legacy In the context of this discussion of expressive- 
of framing Black women’s bodies as inherently ness, the case of Michael Jordan, probably the most 
problematic and in need of refinement. Analyses visible athlete in the world in the 1990s, provides 
of media framings such as that by Carter-Francique much food for thought. A special collection of arti- 



ag 134 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Professional Issues in Kinesiology 

Equality: Native American Mascot Controversy 
One longtime controversy in the sporting world involves the use of American Indian symbols and 

rituals for team names and mascots. One example was the Cleveland Indians and their associated 

mascot named Chief Wahoo. If you are a baseball fan, you’ve seen the team’s former baseball 

logo, which featured the head of Chief Wahoo, whose caricatured representation served stereotyp- 

ically to identify him as an American Indian. Critics argue that such representations create false 

and degrading images of American Indians and contribute to the miseducation of Americans by 

reproducing a kind of cultural illiteracy about indigenous (native) peoples (Staurowsky, 1999). 

Indeed, the elements of “Indian” life featured in sport imagery—war paint, masks, costumes, 
drumming, chants, and ceremonies—are neither authentic nor accurate; instead, they serve as 
pseudo-Indian symbols (King, 2004) that feed long-standing stereotypes of Native Americans. The 
Cleveland Indians retired the Chief Wahoo logo following the 2018 season. 

A number of college teams (e.g., Cornell, Stanford, Syracuse) have seen merit in these argu- 
ments and changed their names and mascots accordingly. Professional teams have been reluc- 
tant—for instance, the Atlanta Braves remain so-named, and the Washington Football Team (NFL) 
changed its name and mascot. Those who defend sport-team use of American Indian symbols 
assert that their use of such imagery constitutes a tribute and argue for their right to adopt and 
own the images for marketing purposes (Staurowsky, 2004). Most American Indians themselves 
are critical of the violent and aggressive images associated with sport team naming. Chief Wahoo, 
for instance, was seen as a racist caricature of an American Indian that contributed to the long 
history of oppression in White dealings with American Indians (King, 2004). Do you think race or 
ethnic-related sport mascots promote equality in sport and society? Why, or why not? 

Citation style: APA 
King, C.R. (2004). This is not an Indian: Situating claims about Indianness in sporting worlds. Journal of 
Sport & Social Issues, 28(1), 3-10. 

Staurowsky, E.J. (1999). American Indian sport imagery and the miseducation of Americans. Quest, 51(4), 
382-392. 

Staurowsky, E.J. (2004). Privilege at play: On the legal and social fictions that sustain American Indian sport 
imagery. Journal of Sport & Social Issues, 28(1), 11-29. 

cles devoted exclusively to this athletic superstar Jordan give us a collage of meanings, some lend- 
demonstrates the ways in which he was constructed ing positive support to a distinctive Black culture 
as a media icon who transcended race (Andrews, and in other cases reinforcing old ideas that help 
1996). In part, this process involved stripping away maintain racial inequalities. Sorting out which are 
some of Jordan’s “blackness”—that is, his racial which requires sociologically informed analysis. 
identity. For example, even as advertisements How much of the image and perceptions of other 
accentuated his physical, athletic Black body (a prominent Black athletes are driven by media and 
common media portrayal of Black athletes), the social forces? 
potential threat of the heightened sexuality ste- 
reotypically associated with Black bodies in U.S. Socioeconomic Relations 
society was defused by frequent references to his 
wholesomeness and strong family ties. Wealth, education, and occupational prestige are all 

These media images of Jordan took hold so ingredients of socioeconomic status. People who 
strongly that even following his divorce, he retained have more money, more education, and greater 
a wholesome image. Such mixed messages proba- occupational prestige have higher socioeconomic 

bly contribute to his popularity among Whites and status and usually more access to power. To illus- 
Black Americans alike (McDonald, 1996). Media trate, it’s not hard to recognize the many advantages 
and documentary (The Last Dance) portrayals of of being a corporate chief executive as compared 



Chapter 5 |S ociology of Physical Activity 135 

with being a custodian at corporate headquarters. family asset development, and racial inequalities 
The chief executive can afford a luxurious lifestyle, in hiring practices. 
whereas the custodian may have to scrimp to make 
ends meet. The chief executive can send his or Participation 
her children to the most expensive universities, It is sometimes difficult to see trends in precise data 
whereas the children of the custodian may have to about sport participation, but the Aspen Institute, 
work to put themselves through college. The chief relying on data from the Sport and Fitness Industry 
executive can make major decisions affecting future Association, provides helpful context in their report 
directions of the company, whereas the custodian on youth participation (Aspen Institute, 2020). In 
may only be able to recommend better ways to table 5.4, many trends are visible from the Aspen 
clean the office. Institute’s data. For example, the increased rates 

Abundant evidence indicates that the income of participation among 13- to 17-year-olds likely 
gap between rich people and poor people is means that this age group has fewer transpor- 
widening in the United States; in fact, the pattern tation issues than younger participants and that 
of income growth has changed from fast and fair participants this age have access to school-based 
to slow and distorted (Economic Policy Institute, programs. In comparison, the 6- to 12-year-old 
2011). For example, between 1947 and 1973, family participants are likely having to find programs with 
income for the bottom 20 percent of households a pay-to-play structure and are relying on family 
grew at a rate of 117 percent, whereas the rate for for transportation. 
the top 20 percent of income earners grew at a We can also see the impact of a significant eco- 
rate of 89 percent. In another report, the Economic nomic gap across racial groups. Especially notable 
Policy Institute (Sommeiller & Price, 2015) tracked in these data are the fact that rates of participation 
unequal or lopsided income growth on both the fluctuate much more among low-income house- 
state and national levels. Data indicated that the holds; a low level of household income is likely 
richest 5 percent of U.S. households had an average most challenging when children are young and new 
income 13 times higher than the poorest 20 percent family households are just getting established. The 
of households. This sort of lopsided income growth impact of the income gap is slightly ameliorated as 
constitutes a long-term trend; specifically, a nearly 13- to 17-year-olds are able to benefit from school- 
30-year pattern (1979 to 2007) shows the top 1 per- based resources for sport participation. These data 
cent taking home more than half (54 percent) of the offer us a snapshot of the link between economic 
total increase in U.S. income. During this period, status and sport involvement: It is our responsibility 
the average income of the bottom 99 percent of U.S. as kinesiology professionals to more deeply con- 
taxpayers grew by 19 percent, while the average sider these conditions and create ways to increase 
income of the top 1 percent grew by more than these activity levels across all income levels. 
10 times as much (by 200 percent). This adverse How might your emergent sociological lens help 
trend of income inequality has been exacerbated you explain these national trends as well as those 
by tax cuts to the wealthy and disproportionate you may be tracking locally, regionally, or even 
hardship from the COVID-19 pandemic, especially globally? In the United States, many youth are first 
for women and non-White workers. introduced to organized sport at the middle school 

As suggested earlier in this chapter, social and high school levels. Coupled with an increased 
categories of race, class, and gender operate not privatization of public park space, this influences 
independently but interdependently. Thus, another rates of participation. It is also important to note 
Economic Policy Institute report (Wilson & Rodg- that governance of sporting spaces plays a parallel 
ers, 2016) found that black men made 22 percent role in significant acts of community displacement 
less in average hourly wages than did White men (Dineen, 2014; Shatkin, 2018). Tracking participa- 
with the same education, experience, metro status, tion rates is helpful, and these data always inform 
and region of residence. Black women made 34 us best when we can put them into a broader 

percent less than White men and 12 percent less context, where we can think about the contours of 

than their White female counterparts. The widen- a society that continues to struggle toward more 
ing wage gap has not affected everyone equally. equitable access to physical activity for all societal 
Since 2000, young Black women (those with 0 members. 
to 10 years of experience) have been hardest hit, The growing income disparity in the United 

perhaps due to a number of structural inequali- States carries important implications for many 

ties, including histories of structural inequality for aspects of life, including education, recreation, 



Mg 136 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Table 5.4 Percentages of Male and Female Children Who Played a Sport on a Regular Basis 

2012 2018 2019 2012 2018 2019 

Coon eee
Male 49.1 38.6 39.1 51.1 42.7 43.5 

Female 33.5 31.4 32.7 39.0 34.8 34.8 

Less than $25,000 33.8 21.6 BE 38.0 28.2 28.0 

Greater than $100,000 48.8 42.7 44.3 49.5 47.3 47.3 

White 44.1 39.7 AD. Or ase 44.2 42.3 

Black 38.9 34.6 34.8 50.6 42.0 42.4 

Asian Pacific Islander 34.8 36.8 34.9 36.9 36.4 37.5 

Hispanic 38.5 33.1 33.9 44.4 40.1 40.3 
Data from the Aspen Institute Project Play 2020 report. 

health care, and physical activity. As the world Wealthy adults tend to participate in individual 
emerges from the COVID-19 global pandemic, activities such as tennis, golf, and skiing, whereas 
economic inequities have been unveiled in new those with lower incomes tend to play team sports 
ways. It has been commonly understood, and such as football, basketball, and baseball (Bureau of 
perhaps ignored, for a long time now that among the Census, 2012). This difference can be accounted 
industrialized nations, countries with wide income for by at least two explanations. First, equipment 
gaps have citizens who are generally less healthy. and facility costs are so high in some sports that 
Much evidence indicates that poor people are they don’t attract people with low incomes. In 
more likely to suffer from health problems, due in addition, the working hours of higher-income pro- 
large part to structural inequalities that result from fessionals often fluctuate, making it more difficult 
privatization of community services and unequal to schedule regular competition with a team. In 
access to physical activity resources (e.g., reduction contrast, blue-collar workers tend to have standard 
in public facilities, increases in fee-for-membership working hours, which makes it easier to schedule 
facilities) (Eitzen, 2016). regular team-sport competition (Sage et al., 2018). 

The United States has experienced enormous On the other hand, expensive physical activi- 
growth in private health and exercise clubs that ties that lend themselves to flexible scheduling 
charge membership fees and cater to the upper may have more appeal to higher-income people. 
middle class and the wealthy. Meanwhile, a decline Examples include skiing, scuba diving, mountain 
has occurred in publicly funded programs in climbing, hang gliding, and white-water kayaking. 
schools and recreation departments that are more Income levels can fluctuate for many reasons, 
accessible to middle- and working-class people. For including a global health crisis such as COVID- 
example, it is increasingly common for students 19. The Aspen Institute (2020) surveyed parents 
to pay user fees to participate in varsity athletics of youth who are regular participants in sport to 
in the public schools and for families to pay user reveal changes in spending and sport involvement 
fees for youngsters to compete in community youth during COVID-19 (see table 5.5). The report found 
sport programs. Thus, even though most U.S. citi- that informal activity, practice time, and competi- 
zens could benefit from physical activity, barriers tion time had all declined; youths spent 6.5 fewer 
are in place that make programs less accessible to hours per week in sport activity; and the gap in 
low-income people. participation rates between youth from low-income 

Income is also linked to the types of sports and and those from high-income households doubled 
recreational activities in which people take part. (Aspen Institute, 2020). Black youth have experi- 



Chapter 5 |S ociology of Physical Activity 

enced a more significant loss in physical activity youth access across household income levels. It is 
engagement than their White peers, and all youth important to note that these data are consistently 
of color have experienced an extended lag in their a stronger reflection of both urban and suburban 
return to sport involvement, while White peers communities, and less representative of rural com- 
have experienced a more swift return to regular munities, leaving much room for study of physical 
sport involvement. activity and sport resources in rural settings. 

In terms of annual household spending on youth 
sport involvement, the Aspen Institute (2020) reports 
an average of $903 per child across all sports, for 
youth ages 6-18, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, Socioeconomic status influences the types of phys- 
with certain sports (e.g., ice hockey at $2,585) ical activities to which people have access; physical 
requiring higher levels of spending than this aver- 

activities that require expensive equipment, facilities, 
age across all sports. This spending by families 

and coaching are mostly beyond the reach of people 
reflects an extremely commercialized youth sports 

at lower income levels. 
industry—one that’s worth $30 billion—that limits 

Table 5.5 Active Hours Per Week for Youth Ages 6-18 Before and During COVID-19 

Sport Before During Before During Before During Before During Before During 

Tackle football 4.2 ef 1.8 2.8 65 30 42 18 ~ ge Ge 
Wrestling She) Sal 1.0 1.9 68 24 51 15 (465 9 8G 
Basketball 4.1 2.6 1.8 2.0 43 720 38 14 |6ag ge 
Baseball a5 2.4 1.6 1.6 45 20 44 16 | ag Ge 
Softball 3.4 23 4:4 133 52 19 +42. 08 § 489 Go 
Flag football 3.5 2.6 2a 2.0 35 22 38 #20 | 330 97 
Volleyball Se 22 1.0 1.6 5.2 1.9 3.9 1.2 9468. 65 
Swimming 3.0 DP) 2.0 2.4 48° 94 32 20 =a Be 
Ice hockey 3.6 1.9 2 123 3.8 1.2 3.5 O08 — 424 6a 
Track and field 2.2 dS 1.0 1.4 51 20 34 O05 — ae 3. 
Skateboarding 6.1 Scf 1.9 1.9 19° = 23 #18 14 9ap og 
Field hockey 2.4 dial 2.0 2.4 28 14 44 29 § ii gg 
Soccer Sal. PR AL ila 13 37° 47 32 10 
Gymnastics Seal 22 0.9 aS) 42 12 26 09 ee 
Tennis 2 2 1.4 1.6 34 19 29 14 | igea o 
Bicycling 2.8 2a: BS Deg 24 20 27 23 |e ee 
Golf 3-3 2.4 2.4 el 25 20 26 19 Bae 
Skiing/snow- 23 Ds! 2A, 2.6 34 O21 26 13 fo 2 
boarding 

Martial arts 3.0 De 0.8 Whee 3.8 1.4 2.2 0.9 Go 55 

Cross country 1.8 lets} 0.8 0.6 Bl 25) 
Lacrosse 4.6 1.8 AA Or 43° 09 #20 08 | au ae. 

Reprinted with permission from Aspen Institute, Project Play State of Play: Pandemic Trends Report (Utah State University, Aspen Institute, 2020). 



Me 138 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Because we can point to many athletes who grew perks such as private jets, housing allowances, 

up in poverty and eventually acquired enormous severance packages, private endorsement deals, 

wealth and fame as professional athletes, many speaking fees, and summer camp income (USA 

people think that talented athletes have a sure path Today, n.d.). In comparison, the top five salaries 

to upward social mobility. In reality, this route is of presidents of public universities in 2019 ranged 

traveled by only a tiny percentage of athletes, most from $475,000 to $900,000 (Sommers & Moody, 

of whom are male. In 2004, for example, the 1,035 2019), and faculty earned an average salary rang- 
major league professional players in football, men’s ing from $20,000 to $126,000 depending on rank 
and women’s basketball, and baseball amounted (McKenna, 2016). 

to only 0.2 percent of the number of high school Some people believe that these incomes are 
athletes playing these sports. More specifically, in justified because many top college coaches are in 
2004, about 16,000 players from colleges and uni- contention for jobs with professional teams that 
versities were eligible to be drafted as rookies in can offer huge sums of money. Taking a different 
the NFL, but only about 250 ended up on a team track, economist Andrew Zimbalist (2001) claims 

roster (Coakley, 2009). that these salaries are made possible in part by 
the fact that collegiate athletes are amateurs—a 

Leadership stark difference from professional leagues, where 
The people who control elite sport are generally at least half of the revenue goes to player salaries. 
quite wealthy. At the top stand the owners of pro- Thus, a kinesiologist with an emergent sociologi- 
fessional sport teams, sport media moguls, and cal perspective could ask, “How might collegiate 
corporate executives. Each year, SportsBusiness sport-revenue streams change if athletes were paid 
Journal reports its list of the 50 most influential more than the cost of a college degree?” Recent 
people in the business of sport; the list is heavily efforts have been made to provide some pay to stu- 
populated by media moguls, league commission- dent-athletes for the extensive amount of time they 
ers, and corporate giants. A similar list, including spend in training to be in intercollegiate athletics. 
25 heavy hitters, was published in 2016 by USA Few opportunities are available for less affluent 
Today (The Big Lead, 2016). These two lists are individuals to occupy important leadership roles. 
not comprehensive, and they may reflect main- In the commercial enterprises of our most popular 
stream ideas about influential persons in sport; spectator sports, the goal is to make money—either 
even so, they illustrate the vast White masculinity for profit (as in the case of media companies and 
that controls sport both in the United States and professional sport franchises) or to improve the 
in international settings. program (as in the case of nonprofit, big-time inter- 

Today, corporate heads are being hired as collegiate sport). People who are particularly adept 
athletic directors in NCAA Division I college and at doing so—for example, winning coaches; astute 
university programs, and their salaries and other collegiate athletic directors; efficient professional 
aspects of financial compensation have to be high sport franchise managers, television executives, 

enough to lure them away from private business. and production personnel; and forward-looking 
Top coaches are also well paid. In 2006, the aver- team owners—are usually rewarded with higher 
age NCAA Division I football coach’s salary was incomes or more profits. Less affluent people have 
$950,000 per year, not including benefits, perks, few opportunities to occupy important leadership 
and incentives. By 2011, it had risen to $1.5 million, roles in this high-stakes business. As an example, 
an increase of nearly 55 percent over the span of most elite coaches make their professional journey 
just six seasons (Brady et al., 2011). Also in 2011, through the collegiate ranks, where a graduate 
at least 32 coaches in the NCAA’s top-tier Football education is often required. This is an expense that 
Bowl Subdivision earned more than $2 million; of may limit this professional occupation to people 
those, 9 made more than $3 million and 3 made who can find educational financial support. 
more than $4 million. In 2016, Alabama’s Nick People with average incomes have much better 
Saban topped the list at more than $7 million, and chances to assume leadership roles in lower-level 
in 2019 the top 16 football coaches earned $5 mil- collegiate programs, high school athletics, and com- 
lion or more, with the number one earner taking munity recreational programs, such as organized 
away $9.3 million (USA Today, n.d.). youth sport and adult athletic leagues. Of course, 

The top 25 coaches in NCAA Division I basket- the competitive structure of these programs often 
ball earn between $3.1 million and $8.1 million in mimics elite athletics. For example, youth sport 
yearly salary alone—that is, not counting additional teams often take the names of major professional 



Chapter 5| Sociology of Physical Activity 139 

squads. In addition, such programs often adopt others know that one has the free time and money 
procedures from elite college and professional to enjoy luxurious physical activities. 
sports, such as cutting players from teams, staging In similar fashion, lean, well-exercised bodies 
playoffs, and naming all-star teams. People at the often serve as status symbols in White North 
lowest income levels don’t participate in sport as American society. They adorn magazine and tele- 
often and are therefore unlikely to advance to posi- vision advertisements, model the latest designer 
tions of leadership even in lower-level programs clothes, and appear in popular movies and tele- 
and leagues. vision shows. A thin, well-contoured “hard body” 

tells others that one has the time, money, and 
self-discipline to shape him- or herself according 

AnSE e to today’s difficult-to-attain standards. These ideals 
Wealthy people occupy influential leadership positions are readily observable in almost any magazine or 

in our popular spectator sports and in some physical movie. Having a personal trainer sets the person 

activities. Those at the lowest levels of socioeconomic off as even more affluent. Of course, most people 

status rarely find themselves in positions of leadership. cannot afford all the body work—exercise, dieting, 
beauty treatments, plastic surgery, and other pro- 
cedures—needed to achieve this look. As a result, 

Leaders in other types of physical activity pro- the look becomes a scarce commodity that marks 
grams—for example, noncompetitive recreational a person as wealthy and stylish. 
activities, instructional programs, and health-re- 
lated exercise programs—also range from people 
who are extremely wealthy to those with modest ON 
incomes. For example, owners of health club Well-sculpted bodies and participation in expensive 
chains, ski resorts, and golf courses are probably sports can mark individuals as wealthy. More gener- 
among the most affluent. Because these are pri- ally, sport can reinforce the socioeconomic status quo 
vate businesses, it is difficult to obtain specific through, for example, the notion that winners and losers 
financial information about them; in addition, as in 

deserve what they get. 
any industry, their profitability undoubtedly varies 
widely. Still, people who manage or teach in such 
facilities are likely to come from the middle and Sport can also send other messages that support 
upper middle classes. In contrast, most people at socioeconomic inequities. For example, winning 
the low end of the socioeconomic continuum are has historically been a prevalent organizing theme 
unlikely to participate enough or have access to in sport media stories and telecasts (Kinkema 
the financing needed to make it into the leadership & Harris, 1998). In addition, winning is usually 
ranks of such programs. attributed to self-discipline, talent, and hard work; 

therefore, if an athlete or a team doesn’t win, then 
Cultural Expression we may assume that the player or team was lazy 
Certain sports and noncompetitive activities are or lacked talent and thus didn’t deserve to win. 
sometimes used to mark economic affluence; exam- Such beliefs underscore the American concep- 
ples include golf, sailing, skiing, and scuba diving. tion of merit that links hard work and talent to 
Belonging to a private country club or indulging in financial success. The flip side is that if someone 
vacations at fancy sport and recreational resorts lets fails financially, then it must mean that she or he 

Attributions of Failure: Lack of Merit or Lack of Money? 

Think about the things that coaches typically tell players when a team loses a game. You can 

either recall your own direct experiences or talk with other people about theirs. How often did 

coaches tell players that they didn’t work hard enough and that if they had practiced harder or 

given more effort during the game, then they would have won? How often did coaches tell players 

that they obviously tried hard but lost to a team that was just more talented? What other reasons 

did coaches offer for losing? Did any (or all) of these reasons lead players to feel that they really 

didn’t deserve to win? 



Me 140 Introduction to Kinesiology 

isn’t talented or didn’t work hard. This reasoning strict laboratory control needed to demonstrate 
allows us to hold the belief that rich people and exact mechanisms of social actions on patterns of 
poor people deserve whatever money they have. physical activity. 
The point here is not that merit is a bad idea. The If you are interested in what you have learned 
problem is that this logic often leads us to overlook here, you might enjoy looking through sport sociol- 
the societal barriers—such as poor nutrition, neigh- ogy textbooks, taking an introductory course in 
borhood gang violence, poor access to libraries this subdiscipline, and exploring its major journals. 
and computers, dysfunctional families, and lack of You can learn more by reviewing research reports 
child care—that hinder efforts by poor people to released by major research centers, such as the 
develop themselves to the fullest (Coakley, 2009). Institute for Diversity and Ethics in Sport at Cen- 

Finally, our popular team sports also send tral Florida University, the Centre for Sport Policy 
messages about the importance of obedience and Studies at the University of Toronto, the National 
teamwork. These qualities are indeed valuable for Research Institute for College Recreational Sports 
most workers. Although some employers may need and Wellness at Ohio State University, the Center 
employees who can break out of traditional molds for the Study of Sport in Society at Northeastern 
and be creative, most simply need people who University, the Aspen Institute, or the Tucker Center 
can work well with others and follow directions. for Research on Girls and Women in Sport. You 
Because sport tends to reinforce obedience and may also wish to listen to sport- and fitness-fo- 
teamwork, it helps maintain our current economic cused podcasts, many of which can be found at 
system. professional organizations’ websites. Sociology of 

physical activity provides information that kinesiol- 
ogists can use to increase our understanding both 

Wrap-Up of our own experiences (as participants, specta- 

Sociology of physical activity takes us beyond tors, and professionals) and of the experiences of 

common, everyday understandings of sport and others. It also helps us think more clearly about the 

exercise. It illuminates patterns of change and changes we would like to make in physical activity 

stability, identifies social problems, and urges mod- programs, as well as the things that we would like 

ifications aimed at enhancing equality and human to keep the same. 

well-being. So far, this subdiscipline of kinesiology Finally, sociology of physical activity invites an 

has emphasized sport, but interest is growing in ongoing, critical engagement with the changing 

exercise, fitness, and societal conceptions of the social conditions in which kinesiologists do their 

human body. Although researchers have analyzed work. This intentional engagement leads to a ques- 

relationships and trends in social life, they have tion that is always relevant for kinesiologists: What 

yet to completely nail down mechanistic factors do I need to know about the social, political, and 

underlying these trends and relationships. This cultural context for physical activity so that I do not 

is not unusual in the social sciences because it mistakenly reinforce existing social inequalities? 

is difficult to bring a slice of social life under the 



Chapter 5 |S ociology of Physical Activity 141 

_MORE INFORMATION ON SOCIOLOGY OF PHYSICALACTIVITY = 
Organizations 

International Sociology of Sport Association 

National Association for Kinesiology in Higher Education 

North American Society for the Sociology of Sport 

SHAPE America 

Journals 

International Review for the Sociology of Sport 

Journal of Sport and Social Issues 

Sociology of Sport Journal 

BIS eVL EVEE ssL ON) eee ree ee 
1 List and discuss the goals of sociological study of physical activity. 

. Describe the expanding research directions in sociology of physical activity from 1970 to 
the present. 

. List and discuss the five research methods commonly used in sociology of physical activity. 

Describe the ties between participation in physical activity and power relationships based 
on gender, race and ethnicity, and socioeconomic status. 

Describe the ties between leadership in physical activity programs and power relationships 
based on gender, race and ethnicity, and socioeconomic status. 

Describe the ties between physical activity expressiveness and power relationships based 
on gender, race and ethnicity, and socioeconomic status. 

Identify the contrasting beliefs that underlie debate over the issue of mascots depicting 
American Indian figures. Which argument would a sociologist of physical activity be most 
likely to advance? Why? 

A bet KPrope i» ) Go to HKPropel to complete the activities for this chapter. 



7 yy 
’ 

rat cots Lh 
eh ory e Hi ¢ 

et 

ed ed is Of: 

re: awe 

= Oe Seemr vet! 
. ; LA, eae 

; rok eare silee ous 

uf 



Motor Behavior 
Katherine T. Thomas, Xiangli Gu, and Jerry R. Thomas 

In this chapter, we will 

e explain what a motor behavior researcher does, 

® present the goals of motor behavior, including motor learning, motor 
control, and motor development, 

¢ explain the research process used by scholars in motor behavior, and 

e present some of the principles ofm otor learning, motor control, and 
motor development. | 



Your roommate coached a youth sacketball team last yea r aé s parto fa cor unity 
project. The players were 11- and 12-year-old girls. This year the team will be coed. an ay ur 

8- and 9-year-olds. Your roommate expects that younger players will be smaller. 

However, you wonder what 
differences there will be in 
teaching younger players, 
what differences there are 
in skill and knowledge, how 
including boys will affect 
the team, and whether the 
experience of coaching last 
year will be a benefit toae 
roommate. 

This chapter introduces the subdiscipline of motor Why Use Motor Behavior? 
behavior and establishes its relationship to other 
scholarly subdisciplines in kinesiology. The chap- Have you ever wondered why you enjoy certain 

ter will help you begin to understand why motor physical activities and not others? Often, being 

behavior holds interest for performers who want skilled at an activity helps us enjoy it. If you pitch 

to improve their movement expertise, for scien- a great fastball, run a quick 5K, boast a killer vol- 

tists who contribute to scholarly study, and for leyball spike, or hit a terrific backhand in tennis, 

professional practitioners who seek to help others then you are more likely to enjoy these activities. 

develop their motor skills. Someone with less skill in these activities may find 

Goals of Motor Behavior 

» To understand how motor skills are learned, how processes such as feedback and practice 
improve learning and performance of motor skills, and how response selection and response 
execution become more efficient and effective 

>» To understand how motor skills are controlled, how the neuromuscular system functions to 
coordinate the muscles and limbs to move the body, and how environmental and individual 
factors affect the mechanisms of response selection and response execution 

>» To understand how the learning and control of motor skills change (i.e., behavioral and neu- 
rological) across the life span, how motor learning and control improve during childhood and 
adolescence, and how motor learning and control deteriorate with aging 



Chapter 6| Motor Behavior 

them frustrating and less enjoyable. Of course, when the equipment and court are not altered, 
there are notable exceptions; for example, some of those challenges are the same for all the players in 
us spend many hours and a great deal of money an age group. As you will read later, principles of 
demonstrating that we have little skill at golf when motor development help us understand and pre- 
compared with elite golfers—or simply compared dict the challenges children face to be physically 
to par! active. The principles are (a) children are more 

Think about a skill you like and do well—for alike than different, (b) children are not miniature 
example, riding a bike. How did you learn to ride adults, (c) no body is perfect, and (d) good things 
a two-wheel bicycle? What types of practice expe- are earned (Thomas & Thomas, 2008). From those 
riences worked best for you? How did you learn to principles your roommate could assume that boys 
coordinate the movements of your feet in order to and girls are more alike than different. In fact, it is 
pedal, your hands in order to steer, and both while probably unwise to assume major differences and 
balancing? Do you remember early times when to treat young children differently based on sex. 
you moved slowly and wobbled, could not turn Children are unique, but the variation is as great 
quickly, needed help starting, and often fell rather within as between sexes. Further, children are not 
than stopping in a controlled manner? In what miniature adults, so what works for an adult is not 
ways did your brain and nervous system develop likely to work well for children. Taken together, 
and adjust so that you could improve your control those principles suggest that your roommate will 
and coordination? need to individualize practice and coaching tech- 

Practice is an important factor in learning skills niques to this age and to individual children. The 
across the life span. Most people improve motor principle that nobody (and no body!) is perfect 
skills yet never understand how the nervous system suggests mistakes and errors are normal and are 
adapts, how it develops or controls movement, likely to be frequent in this younger age group. 
or how best to use practice in order to improve Finally, practice will be critical as good things, like 
performance. The study of motor behavior focuses improvement, are earned. Motor behavior helps us 
on how skills are learned and controlled, how you understand how to plan for and adapt to learners 
can help people learn, and how movement changes of different ages. 
from birth through the end of life. Teachers and coaches should be general experts 

People generally believe that practice improves on practice because much of their training in kine- 
performance; after all, we see evidence of this siology focuses on how to organize and conduct 
notion at home, in school, and in the community. practice. However, we all may encounter situations 
For example, parents urge children to practice that call for us to apply knowledge about practice 
playing the piano, athletes ask coaches for help and skill acquisition. Consider these examples: 
in practicing sport skills, and students perform 

e Your tennis partner asks you to watch her 
practice exercises to learn keyboard typing. Clearly, 

serve and advise her about how to avoid so 
however, some forms of practice are superior to 

many faults. 
others. Thus, important questions about prac- 
tice include what, how, and how much? Another ¢ You volunteer for a youth football league, 

important question is, “What can be changed with where the topic of discussion is how best 

practice?” For example, is an expert better because to group kids for fair competition. 

of practice, or was she born with special talent? e You drive to school every day and realize 
Research in motor behavior tells us that parents and that on many days you do not remember a 
teachers are partly right when they say, “Practice single event during your drive; you also real- 
makes perfect.” More precisely, they might have ize that countless other people are driving 

said, “Correct practice makes perfect”; as research in the same scary way. 

tells us, the effectiveness of practice is influenced e You work part-time at an assisted living 
by many factors. center, where you see that many residents 

In the chapter-opening scenario, is the room- have difficulty standing up from a sitting 
mate’s concern that the children will be smaller position, balancing, and grasping small 
the major issue? Clearly, height and strength are objects. You wonder why this is so and 
beneficial in basketball, and thus younger and whether they can regain these skills. 
smaller children will be at a disadvantage when 

e You have a new keyboard and are making 
compared to older children. The height of the goal, errors as you type. What causes this, and 
the size of the ball, and the size of the court may 

how can you correct it? 
be altered to accommodate younger players. Even 



a 146 Introduction to Kinesiology 

You have probably encountered similar situa- chology that used movement or physical activity to 

tions involving movement learning and control that understand cognition. The subdiscipline of motor 

you couldn’t immediately explain. Although most behavior also incorporates information from biol- 

of us can talk on a superficial level about motor ogy and zoology because physical activity is also 

skill performance—“Did you see how long he was affected by factors such as heredity, aging, and 

off the ground? He floated through space to dunk growth (e.g., Thomas & Thomas, 2008). Researchers 

that ball!’—few people really understand how a also apply principles and laws from physics to the 
person controls, learns, and develops motor skill study of humans in motion. Thus, what you know 
over time. The study of motor behavior provides about physics, biology (or zoology), and psychol- 
answers to many of these questions and helps us ogy will help you understand motor behavior. 
understand the process of the development, con- In addition, you have some applied experience 
trol, and learning of motor skills (Thomas, 2006; with motor behavior. Remember your physical edu- 
Ulrich & Reeve, 2005). Understanding this process cation teachers or coaches asking you to practice 
will allow you to better answer such questions and passing a volleyball, swinging a golf club, or drib- 
plan more effective practices. bling a soccer ball repeatedly? Perhaps they gave you 

College students may see themselves merely as feedback about your practice, such as the following: 
learners in a class rather than as everyday scholars “Bend a little more at the knees.” “Follow through 
engaging in more systematic scholarly study in with a smooth stroke.” “Keep the ball as close to your 
kinesiology. Remember, however, that you have feet as possible.” In doing so, they were implement- 
already accumulated a large body of experiential ing principles of motor behavior—specifically, that 
and embodied knowledge (see chapter 2), which correct practice and appropriate feedback improve 
you can use to learn about motor behavior. For performance. Of course, some of us can recall adults 
example, you may recognize some of the theories who provided less helpful information, such as 
and research methods used in the study of motor “practice harder” or “hit the ball.” The study of motor 
behavior from an introductory, developmental, behavior guides us in providing better situations for 
or experimental psychology course. The study of learning and practice, as well as understanding why 
motor behavior partially began as a branch of psy- some cues and feedback work better than others. 

Motor Learning Theory in Practice 

Think about a time when you were injured and could not perform a skill in the way that you usually 
do. For example, perhaps you sprained an ankle and had to use crutches to walk. In such a sit- 
uation—when you can use only one leg or need to minimize sideward forces that create pain—a 
simple sequence such as trying to go from standing to sitting and back to standing becomes a 
different kind of challenge. Over time, you probably got better and more confident at moving in the 
“new” way. In other words, practice improved your performance. 

Once you healed, however, you could go back to walking, sitting, and standing in the way you 
had done before the injury. This reversion is possible because the sit-to-stand skill was so well 
learned that we refer to it as “overlearned.” Other skills that you did not practice while injured 
may also have returned quickly to their former level once you were able to use the sprained ankle. 
These skills were learned and retained. You were even able to adapt some skills, such as walking 
and stair climbing, during the recovery period (e.g., marking time—leading with the same foot 
going up and down the stairs to reduce stress on the injured ankle and foot). This constitutes a 
form of transfer. 

Thus, we see the motor learning concepts of practice, transfer, retention, and learning in our 
everyday lives. Unfortunately, injured people sometimes develop dysfunctional movement strategies 
and adaptations in strength and flexibility that are difficult to retrain. The resulting challenge of 
relearning functional skills can be addressed by kinesiology professionals who use their knowledge 
of motor behavior in medicine and allied health careers. 

In school settings, for well-learned skills, teachers may begin by having students use a skill in 
a game or gamelike situation. In such cases, instruction, demonstration, and feedback are less 
likely to include information and skill correction and more likely to focus on strategy. 



Chapter 6| Motor Behavior 147 

The subdiscipline of motor behavior is part of research and service, but some scholars work in 
the behavioral sphere within the study of phys- research facilities that are not associated with uni- 
ical activity, along with psychology of sport and versities. Motor behavior research can be conducted 
exercise. As people practice physical activity, they in a university laboratory, in a clinical setting (e.g., a 
experience the essence of motor behavior by trying hospital), or in an industrial or military setting. Here 
to control and learn movements. Scholars of motor are a few examples: A military researcher might 
behavior study how motor skills are learned, con- investigate which training methods best improve 
trolled, and developed in order to assist people as fighter pilots’ reactions to electronic threat signals. 
they practice and experience physical activity. The A motor behavior researcher working in industry 
knowledge generated by motor behavior research is might look for the optimal method for training 
put into practice by professionals, such as coaches workers to assemble a product. Medical and edu- 
and teachers, who try to improve people’s physical cational researchers often study motor learning, 
skills. Other examples include gerontologists who motor control, and motor development. They 
help improve the motor skills of people who are might investigate, for instance, how the nervous 
elderly, physical therapists who help injured patients system changes with age in terms of controlling 
with rehabilitation, and athletic trainers who work movement, what the best methods are for teaching 
to prevent injuries and rehabilitate injured players. rehabilitation protocols to patients in physical ther- 

Kinesiology is the multifaceted study of physical apy, how the game performance of youth soccer 
activity, and motor behavior is one of its subdisci- players can be improved, or what causes movement 
plines. Each of the subdisciplines contributes to our deterioration in persons with Parkinson’s and other 
understanding of human movement and physical neuromuscular diseases. 
activity; some are more closely related than others The duties of motor behaviorists at universities 
based on the methods or applications. Because typically include research, teaching, and service. 
motor behavior research must document tech- Their research may focus on learning, control, or 
nique and performance variables, motor behavior development. Their teaching duties may include 
is also closely associated with biomechanics from courses in motor behavior or related courses such 
the biophysical sphere of study. Motor behavior as biomechanics or sport psychology, research 
research also uses some of the same biome- methods, measurement and evaluation, and ped- 
chanical research methods and equipment. The agogy and youth sport. Service for a university 
knowledge from motor behavior is applied with faculty member may include evaluating motor 
biomechanical knowledge in the treatment of dis- disorders, managing a program for individuals 
abilities and injuries and to the observed changes with motor disorders, and conducting workshops 
in movement across the life span. Movement skills or clinics about motor disorders for profession- 
change predictably during infancy and in old age; als. Whatever the setting, most motor behavior 
biomechanics and motor behavior research quan- researchers also write grant applications and 
tify these changes as demonstrated later in this perform professional service, such as reviewing 
chapter. Motor behavior produces knowledge that manuscripts for scholarly journals. 
is unique and foundational in many professional The subdiscipline of motor behavior produces 
applications. For example, the pedagogical areas knowledge of how people achieve motor skills 
of physical education and adapted physical edu- across the life span. The subdiscipline involves 
cation (for individuals with disability) should also three areas: motor learning, motor control, and 

be based on what we know about how people motor development (a developmental view of 
learn and control movements. These and other motor learning and motor control). Motor learn- 
physical activity professions use knowledge about ing research deals with the acquisition of skilled 
motor behavior to design instructional programs movements as a result of practice, whereas work 

and evaluate motor skill. For example, a physical in motor control seeks to understand the neural, 

education teacher may use motor behavior infor- physical, and behavioral aspects of movement 

mation to plan a series of instructional classes for (Schmidt et al., 2019). Both are often evaluated 

6th graders to improve soccer dribbling techniques. across the life span, resulting in a developmental 
view of how motor skills change. 

The study of motor learning and the study of 
What Do Motor Behaviorists Do? motor control are not distinctly different areas, but 

they tend to ask different questions. The goals of 
Scholars who study motor behavior are most often 

employed at universities, where they teach and do studying motor learning include understanding 



mm 148 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Contrasting Motor Control and Motor Learning 

Do you remember learning how to drive a car? What was one task that was difficult for you to 

master (e.g., braking smoothly, turning, signaling, parallel parking)? Now think about the last time 

you drove somewhere familiar—for example, to school today. Sometimes we cannot remember 

anything about a familiar drive. Consider how your skill has changed as a result of learning to drive 

and then continuing to practice. When you were learning to drive, you had to think about every 

movement—moving your foot from the accelerator to the brake, using the turn signal, turning the 

steering wheel. Later, you thought only about the traffic and where you were going. Now, on an 

often-traveled route, you monitor the traffic with intermittent attentiveness. 

The study of motor learning helps us understand how we learn skills such as driving a car so well 

that the skill becomes automatic. What other skills have you learned so well that you do not think 

about them either during or after the performance? Are there any situations in which you do have to 

think about a well-earned skill? For example, you may type text rapidly and accurately on a keyboard 

but slow down and even have to look at the keys when typing numbers or symbols. When task 
demands change, we sometimes move from automatic control of movements to conscious control. 

Thus, you can see that motor control and motor learning are related. Motor control is essential 
for every movement—from poorly skilled to well skilled. Motor learning, on the other hand, is 
responsible for the shift from poorly skilled to highly skilled movement. One way to judge when 
a movement is well learned or highly skilled is to recognize that the movement is automatic or 
executed without conscious control. Because we may have less practice at driving in storms and 
heavy traffic, that type of driving is not well learned and is therefore not automatic. 

the influence of feedback, practice, and individual ¢ Pilots learning to control an airplane 
differences, especially as they relate to the retention ¢ Young children learning to control a crayon 
and transfer of motor skill. The goals of studying when coloring 
motor control, on the other hand, include under- 
standing how to coordinate the muscles and joints All of these activities, and many others, involve 

during movement, how to control a sequence of motor behavior and thus hold interest for research- 

movements, and how to adapt environmental infor- ers and practitioners. Thus, the goals of motor 

mation to plan and adjust movements. In addition, behavior study are important not only in sport 

scholars are often interested in exploring how but also in the general field of physical activity. 

motor learning and motor control vary across age As we saw in part I, understanding the learning, 

groups, from children to senior citizens. control, and development of movements plays an 

When you think of motor behavior, you may essential role in our culture and society. For exam- 

think of sport skills. However, consider the many ple, parents’ first clue that their baby is develop- 

other types of movements that people use in their ing normally may be a reflex or motor milestone, 

daily activities: such as grasping a finger rubbed across the palm 
(the palmar grasp reflex) or taking the first steps 

* Babies learning to use a fork and spoon around 1 year of age. People have probably been 
* Dentists learning to control a drill while asking questions about motor behavior since the 

looking in a mirror beginning of time; scientists have been seeking the 

* Surgeons controlling a scalpel and micro- answers to those questions for more than 100 years. 

surgeons using a laser while viewing a 
magnified video image of the brain 

History of Motor Behavior 
* Children learning to roller-skate 

Research has a 
* A junior football player working on throwing long history in all three areas of 

moto
skills after an injury r behavior—motor learning, motor control, 

and motor development—and the focus of research 
* A stroke patient relearning the walking skill in each area has changed dramatically (for a his- 
* Dancers performing carefully choreo- torical review, see Thomas, 2006; Ulrich & Reeve, 

graphed movements 2005). For example, in the late 1800s and early 



Chapter 6] Motor Behavior 

1900s, researchers were primarily interested in to select and effectively train pilots (Adams, 1987). 
studying motor skills as a way to understand the Thus, motor skills were viewed as a necessary 
mind; in other words, motor skill was viewed as a component in military efforts, but not because 
way to examine cognition (Abernethy & Sparrow, understanding motor skills was an important area 
1992). Adams (1987) identified five themes from of study in itself. 
this early work that have persisted through the Beginning in the 1960s, and with increasing 
years: knowledge of results, distribution of prac- momentum in the early 1970s, the study of motor 
tice, transfer of training, retention, and individual behavior evolved as a scholarly subdiscipline of 
differences. These five themes provide the foun- kinesiology. With this change, the scholars doing 
dation for the study of motor learning. Although motor behavior research were no longer neuro- 
these themes persist, researchers are now focusing physiologists or psychologists; they were special- 
on the motor skills themselves rather than simply ists in physical activity. Franklin Henry’s paper on 
studying them in order to understand cognition. memory drum theory (Henry & Rogers, 1960) may 

Similarly, motor control research can be traced have been the first major theoretical or landmark 
to research in the late 1800s on the “springlike” study (Ulrich & Reeve, 2005) from the discipline of 
qualities of muscle (Blix, 1892-1895). Other early kinesiology (called physical education at the time). 
research included Sherrington’s (1906) seminal Henry’s theory stated that reaction time was slower 
work on neural control, which is still useful in for complex movements because those movements 
explaining how the nervous system controls mus- took more planning time. In this view, for exam- 
cles during movement. In both cases, the purpose ple, movements with several segments—involving 
was to understand not motor behavior but biology. moving from one position to a second position and 

There was great interest in motor behavior then to a third position—required a longer reaction 
research during the World War II era from 1939 to time than did single-segment movements because 
1945 (Thomas, 1997) because the military needed the brain required more time to specify the needed 

Kinesiology Colleagues 

Jennifer Chuang 
Jennifer Chuang, PT, DPT, is a travel physical therapist. She 
has published and presented research conducted with the Uni- 
versity of Texas at Arlington’s Developmental Motor Cognition 
Lab and at Texas Woman's University (TWU) focused on the 
exercise capacity of individuals with spinal cord injuries. Since 
her graduation from TWU, she has become a Certified Lymph- 
edema Therapist with additional training in treating patients 
with cancer. Jennifer continues to be passionate about treating 
various patient populations, including the pediatric and neuro- 
logical populations to optimize their quality of life. 

Jennifer uses motor behavior principles in her daily prac- 
tice. She has applied many types of augmented feedback 
to assist with motor learning by providing information to her 
patients. She noticed in her daily practice that patients must 
be challenged but also must have some level of success 
throughout practice in order to keep them engaged and moti- 

vated. Tasks are adapted not only to challenge patients so that 

they can improve, but also to prevent their feeling defeated by unachievable goals. For example, 

a child may see other children playing with a basketball and want to participate, but if the child 

cannot perform the task, he or she can be discouraged by the potential for negative augmented 

feedback. It is important to provide supportive motor learning experiences with positive augmented 

feedback so that learners will be encouraged to perform the task or similar tasks independently, 

outside of therapy. 



ee 150 Introduction to Kinesiology 

information. The current work on motor programs the developmental nature of motor learning and 

(representations in the brain of plans for move- motor control in their research through the 1950s 

ment) evolved from Henry’s memory drum theory. and 1960s. 
Current research in motor control and motor Just as research in motor learning and motor 

learning usually focuses on understanding how control increased around 1970, developmental 

the neuromuscular system controls and repeats research addressing the questions of motor learn- 

movements. One purpose of this research is to ing and motor control also became popular (Clark 

understand and develop treatments for conditions et al., 2019; Thomas & Thomas, 1989; Whitall et 

such as Parkinson’s disease and spinal cord inju- al., 2020). Motor development was considered part 
ries; another is to improve performance in sport of the subdiscipline of motor behavior because 
and physical activity. In some cases, technological it studied the same topics, in this case develop- 
advances combine with motor control to allow mentally. However, two research themes in motor 
patients to use complex prostheses and to allow development continued from the years before 
quadriplegics to operate robotic arms with their 1970: the influence of growth and maturation on 
brains. This cutting-edge technology is based on motor performance and the developmental patterns 
motor control theory and research. of fundamental movements. Growth influences 

the performance of motor skills in children over 
time; however, at the cessation of growth (i.e., at 

ARE CO Ne ee maturity), growth is no longer a factor. Because 

The subdiscipline of motor behavior continues to evolve growth cannot explain all improvement in motor 

in response to research, technological developments, performance during childhood, developmental 

and theoretical models. The study of motor learning scientists have turned to motor control, motor 
learning, and biomechanics for more information. 

and the study of motor control are distinct, yet both 
Thus, we now see three lines of motor development 

seek to understand human movement. 
research: motor learning in children, motor control 
in children, and the influence of growth on motor 

A developmental approach to motor learning learning, motor control, and performance. 

and motor control (also known as motor develop- 

ment) originated in developmental psychology and 
Research Methods 

child development. The study of motor develop- 
ment grew from “baby biographies” (many written for Motor Behavior 
before 1900) describing changes that occur in the 

As you may be aware, research begins with a 
reflexes and movements of infants. The early work 

question stated as a hypothesis. The question 
used twins to establish the role of environment and 

helps the scientist decide who will participate in 
heredity in shaping behavior (Bayley, 1935; Dennis 
& Dennis, 1940; Dennis, 1938; Galton, 1876; Gesell, the research project, what type of task the person 

will do, and what the researcher will measure in 
1928; McGraw, 1935, 1939). As with motor control 
and motor learning, the initial research in motor order to answer the question. This process is used 

development took place not because scholars were in most kinesiology research. 

interested in motor skills per se but because they It is a complex endeavor to understand how 

were using the study of motor skills to understand movements are learned, how they are controlled, 

other areas of interest. and how they change across the life span. In fact, 

In the 1940s and 1950s, developmental psychol- in order to answer one question it is usually nec- 

ogists lost interest in the developmental aspects of essary to perform many experiments. Motor behav- 

motor skill. Study in this area might have ended ior researchers have concentrated on techniques 

if not for three motor development scholars from for measuring movement speed and accuracy. 

kinesiology—Ruth Glassow (Slone, 1984), Larry Motor control and motor learning researchers use 

Rarick (Park et al., 1996), and Anna Espenschade technology similar to that used by researchers in 

(1960). Their emphasis, which differed from that biomechanics. During the past 50 years, research 

of the developmental psychologists, focused on technology (e.g., computing, high-speed imaging, 

how children acquire skills—for example, how electromyography [EMG]) has advanced and 

fundamental movement patterns are formed and adapted to control the testing situation, and pre- 

how motor performance is affected by growth. cisely record and analyze movements for motor 

These three scholars maintained the focus on behavior studies. Moreover, noninvasive electronic 



Chapter 6| Motor Behavior 151 

Professional Issues in Kinesiology 

Expertise: When to Specialize in a Sport? 
Research on motor expertise often compares novices with experts in order to determine how they 
differ in various sports. The study of motor expertise is an appropriate recent addition to the study 
of motor development because age and experience are associated with increases in expertise. 
The study of sport experts has brought forth new thinking about the age at which a young person 
should begin to specialize in one sport (Céte et al., 2009; Goodway & Robinson, 2015) and what 
benefits may result from engaging in more varied experiences during childhood and adolescence. 
Data on elite performers and sport dropouts suggest that participating in more than one sport per 
year is beneficial up to 15 years of age. At about that age, it is appropriate to begin specializing 
in a sport; the exception occurs in sports where peak performance comes before physical matu- 
ration, such as women’s gymnastics. Thus, at about age 15, athletes in most sports can decide 
to continue just for fun or to specialize with the goal of achieving elite performance. 

Early specialization has been influenced by two notions—first, that it is associated with exper- 
tise, and second, that 10,000 hours of practice are necessary. However, the work done by Céte 
and colleagues (2009) presents compelling evidence that for most athletes, sport specialization 
should not be encouraged until at least age 12 and as late as age 15. Furthermore, a more accu- 
rate target for accumulated practice time to reach expert levels of performance would be 3,000 
to 4,000 hours as opposed to 10,000 hours. What other health and kinesiology sub-disciplinary 
issues should be considered by parents when their children express an early interest in sport 
specialization (Jayanthi et al., 2013; Waldron et al., 2020)? 

Citation style: APA 
Cote, J., Lidor, R., & Hackfort, D. (2009). ISSP position stand: To sample or to specialize? Seven postulates 
about youth sport activities that lead to continued participation and elite performance. International Journal 
of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 7(1), 7-17. 

Jayanthi, N., Pinkham, C., Dugas, L., Patrick, B., & LaBella, C. (2013). Sports specialization in young athletes: 
Evidence-based recommendations. Sports Health, 5(3), 251-257. 

Waldron, S., DeFreese, J.D., Register-Mihalik, J., Pietrosimone, B., & Barczak, N. (2020). The costs and ben- 
efits of early sport specialization: A critical review of the literature. Quest, 72(1), 1-18. 

measurement technologies have allowed the use of the question, “Does practicing a simple movement 
real-world movements instead of simple movement increase its speed?” This research design compares 
tasks invented in the laboratory just for research two groups (randomly formed) on the same task 
purposes. Motor behavior courses often include (movement speed). The treatment in this example is 
laboratory experiences so that students like you practice: If two groups practice differing amounts, 
can repeat the classic experiments and theories will their performance on the task be different? 
that you study. This type of hands-on learning has In the second design, the within-group design, all 
demonstrated benefits (Hofstein & Kind, 2012) participants are exposed to two or more different 

over lecture alone. treatments and are tested on the same task. 
Let’s consider an example that could be con- 

Types of Studies ducted with either design. Suppose, for example, 
that you want to study whether a participant’s 

There are many ways to answer any particular reaction time (how quickly the movement begins 
research question. Motor behavior research often after a signal) varies with the size of the target. You 
uses three experimental designs or techniques: could tell the participant that after you say “go,” 
between-group, within-group, and descriptive. she is to move a stylus as rapidly as possible to a 
The between-group design compares two or more target 30 centimeters (12 inches) away; the target is 
groups exposed to different treatments Gnterven- a circle either 2 or 4 centimeters (0.8 or 1.6 inches) 
tions) but tests them using the same task. For exam- in diameter (see figure 6.1). The question is whether 
ple, a researcher could use this design to answer the time between hearing the signal and beginning 



Me 152 Introduction to Kinesiology 

the movement (i.e., the reaction time) changes Studying the Early Stages of Learning 
depending on the target size. In a between-group 

Motor learning research has often used novel 
design, one group could move to the 2-centimeter 

learning tasks to provide certainty that no par- 
target and the second group to the 4-centimeter 

ticipant has tried the task before. This approach 
target. In a single-group (within-group) design, half 

eliminates the advantage that some participants 
the participants could move to the 2-centimeter 

might have because they have practiced the task 
target first and then to the 4-centimeter target, and 

before the experiment. Novel learning tasks tend 
the other half could move to the 4-centimeter target 

to be simple—so simple, in fact, that in order to 
first and then to the 2-centimeter target. In deciding 

make the task challenging the participant is some- 
which design to use, an investigator should con- 

times asked to wear a blindfold (see figure 6.2). 
sider whether changing target sizes interferes with 

Because the task is novel, participants are unlikely 
performance. If so, then a between-group design 

to have done it before; because it is simple, partic- 
is preferred; if not, then the investigator will use a 

ipants can master it in a short time; and because 
within-group design because he or she will not have 

vision is occluded, learners must rely on what 
to test as many participants. 

they remember about the movement (e.g., speed, 
The third type of experimental design used in 

distance, beginning and ending points). Vision is 
motor behavior research is descriptive research. 

the dominant sense, and when vision is present 
Here, the investigator measures or observes partici- 

(and not occluded), the other types of information 
pants performing a task. Sometimes the investigator 

about movement must be controlled. 
observes the same participants several times in 

You might question whether the results of these 
order to trace changes. For example, an investigator 

experiments can be applied to real-world, complex 
might measure reaction time in the same children 

movement situations. This is a good point! These 
when they are 4, 6, and 8 years old in a longitudinal 

simple tasks do allow us to study improvement, 
design. In other cases, the research compares the 

and they have helped us understand a great deal 
performance of different groups in a cross-sectional 

about how movements are learned. However, using 
design; for instance, 4-, 6-, and 8-year-old children 

simple tasks in research limits what the researcher 
might be tested for reaction time. Researchers 

can learn. One reason is that this approach studies 
often use this cross-sectional research technique 

the outcome of the movement (the product) rather 
to describe age differences or differences between 

than the nature of the movement (the process) 
experts and novices. Descriptive research differs 

itself (Christina, 2017; Rymal, 2018). Novel learning 
from research using the first two techniques 

experiments are not helpful for researchers inter- 
because in this approach the participants receive 

ested in physical activity or sport tasks in which 
no intervention or experimental treatment. 

performers have had thousands of trials (e.g., 
keyboard typing, baseball batting). 

/ euar s 
Reaction time ia 
key ee 

GEUTEY A reaction-time study might measure how GEMTSA Linear positioning task with blindfolded 
fast a movement occurs after a signal and whether the participant. 
movement is affected by the size of the target object. 



Chapter 6| Motor Behavior 

SRR ONT ee ee ee ee Se regard to many sport and motor skills. This type of 

Before the early 1980s, motor behavior research often experiment would be nearly impossible to do in 

used simple, novel tasks to study early skill learning; a motor learning class because the students might 
not represent the range of expertise necessary 

such research helped us understand how beginners 
(novice to expert). 

learn new motor skills. 

Measuring Movements 

Studying Expert Performers The tasks used in motor behavior research provide 
a number of ways to measure movements and their 

To address the limitations of studying novel learning outcomes. For example, suppose that senior citi- 
tasks, some scholars have focused their studies on zens perform a movement that involves reaching 
experts. These investigators ask, “What do expert 30 centimeters (12 inches) and then grasping and 
performers do during practice and competition?” lifting containers of different sizes and weights. We 
One way to answer the question is to compare could simply count the number of times that each 
expert performers with novice performers and senior citizen successfully lifts a container (in this 
evaluate how they differ in terms of perception and task, reaching and grasping are prerequisites to 
knowledge—particularly decision-making, skill, and lifting) and use the number of successful lifts as 
game performance variables. In these studies, exper- an outcome measurement. By doing so, we might 
tise is established according to a criterion such as find, for instance, that the number of successful 
national team membership or ranking in the sport. lifts decreased as the objects got smaller or heavier. 

The knowledge and skills of a sport are often Although that would be an interesting finding, our 
unique to that sport (Baker & Young, 2014; Thomas long-term goal would probably be to understand 
& Thomas, 1994)—for example, knowing about why or how the size or weight of the object influ- 
and being skilled in tennis does not help one play ences success. Therefore, we would probably need 
soccer. Knowledge does provide an early benefit in to examine the process of the movement. 
sport; for example, the game procedures of tennis To examine process, we could use high-speed 
and badminton are similar, and so a tennis player video of the movement, taken with two cameras, 
playing badminton for the first time would have and evaluate how movement differs for 55-, 65-, and 
some understanding of the game’s goal and order 75-year-old participants. From such videos, research- 
of operations. However, the techniques of these two ers can measure kinematics (location, velocity, 
sports may interfere with each other. Evidence exists acceleration—see chapter 8 on biomechanics). Other 
for transfer of pattern recognition, a cognitive skill, measures include muscle activation (EMG) of the arm 
in sport experts (Abernethy et al., 2005). In another and hand during the movement, the pinching force 
study, video recordings of badminton players were between the forefinger and thumb during the grasp, 
used to determine how age and expertise influence error in the movement, speed of the movement, reac- 
players’ ability to predict where a birdie struck by tion time before the movement begins, and accuracy 
an opponent would land. Participants looked at a of the movement. These process measures might help 
video of a badminton player hitting a shot. The video us understand how the reach, grasp, or lift changed 
had been altered (e.g., by erasing the head, arm, or for the various weights and sizes of objects. 
racket or by zeroing in on certain motions), and in Using our hypotheses (educated guesses), we 
some cases information was erased that was needed could then begin to answer our original ques- 
for accurately predicting where the birdie would tion. For example, we might hypothesize that the 
land. As you might guess, expert players could make reaching and grasping phase would be the same 
better, faster predictions with less information than for objects of the same size, even when weight 
could novice players. Experts also looked at different varied, but that the lift would be different when the 
body parts than novices did and therefore based weight changed. Do you think reach, grasp, or lift 
their decisions on different sources of information. would be different as we changed size but kept the 
Their advantage seemed to derive from playing weight the same? If we predict that reach or grasp 
experience rather than age. changes, then it is critical to measure the process. 

You can see how this finding might help a coach, 
teacher, or player improve badminton play. It also Characteristics of Movement Tasks 
helps us understand something about skill learning 

because researchers have found similar patterns in In addition to deciding what to measure, motor 
behavior scientists must consider the characteristics 



ae 154 Introduction to Kinesiology 

of the movements they study (Gentile, 1972). For on a different but related task or in a different 

example, some movements are more continuous context. One example that holds meaning for most 

(e.g., performing a gymnastics routine, riding a students relates to the three most threatening words 

bicycle), whereas others are more discrete, involving in college: “comprehensive final exam.” At the end 
a short period with a distinct beginning and end of the semester, how much do you remember when 
(e.g., striking a ball with a bat). Furthermore, some taking a comprehensive final examination? The pur- 
movements are more open in character, whereas pose of the examination is to determine whether 
others are more closed. One example of an open you learned what was taught in the course. For 
movement is hitting a thrown ball; the environmen- those who have really learned something, a com- 
tal characteristics change from trial to trial because prehensive final examination is not a problem. As 
the batter must respond to the speed and location of you will see in your motor learning class, retention 
the oncoming ball. In contrast, a closed movement is also used to measure learning in motor skills. 
takes place in a more consistent environment, in Learning can also be measured in terms of trans- 
which the performer tries to do the same thing each fer to other skills, in which one must do a slightly 
time (e.g., as in archery or bowling). different version of the task. Experts are better at 

transferring information or skills than are novices; 

Measuring Learning and Transfer experts can also perform well after periods without 
practice (referred to as retention intervals). Many 

The idea of learning—as determined by retention coaches feel frustrated when a team learns a play 
and transfer—is related to the requisite number during practice but has trouble executing it in 
of hours of practice in the previous discussion competition. This situation illustrates the lack of 
about experts. A motor skill can be examined at transfer; that is, it suggests that the team did not 
any point, from the first attempt to well beyond really learn the play since it could not execute when 
mastery. The goal of most practice is learning, and faced with new defensive pressures. The transfer in 
learning involves long-term change in performance; the practice-to-game example is a change of con- 
therefore, in motor behavior, learning is usually text by the addition of defense, speed, and other 
defined as performance in retention and transfer factors that were not present during practice. One 
trials scheduled after practice sessions. Retention example of a task that is well learned based on both 
is measured by performing the task after a time retention and transfer is riding a bike. You can ride 
without practice to determine recall. Transfer can successfully after a winter off (retention), and you 
be tested immediately to determine how practice can negotiate new routes and terrain (transfer). 
on one task or in one context affects performance 

Expertise: More Than Good Stats 

Suppose you want to research the talent of the players on a women’s softball team. You have 
the conventional data about each player, such as batting average, RBIs, home runs, and fielding 
percentage. You suspect, however, that these data do not always reflect the contributions that 
players make to the team. You also have video recordings of five games played by the team, taken 
with a wide-angle camera that shows the complete field. What kind of data could you get from the 
video recordings to answer the following questions? 

» How many times did each player hit the ball hard while at bat? 

>» How many times did each player make a special effort that doesn’t show up in the scorebook 
(e.g., backed up a throw, saved a bad throw, moved up a runner)? 

Researchers and teachers must identify the characteristics (open or closed, discrete or con- 
tinuous) of the tasks that they study for two reasons. First, the results of two studies may differ 
if the task characteristics differ. Second, the characteristics of the task used in the study must 
match the questions asked. For example, if you want to know why something happens in bowling, 
you should not seek answers in the form of open, continuous tasks. Teachers must also know 
how to draw distinctions between task characteristics because skills of one type may require a 
different instructional strategy than skills of another type. 



Chapter 6| Motor Behavior 

ANS ON se a computer, then when you accidentally touched 

To study motor skill acquisition, researchers must also a hot burner on a stove, a message might pop up 

study how well skills are retained and how they transf asking “Are you sure?” before you could pull your 
er 

hand away!) From this perspective, the goal of motor 
to other, similar situations. 

behavior is to explain response selection (how the 
skill to be used is selected) and response execution 

Motor learning research tells us the reason for (how the selected skill is performed). 
retention and transfer. Once you learned to ride a 
bike, you continued to practice until the skill was Motor Learning 
automatic and “overlearned.” Getting students to 

The two principles we have selected to repre- 
this point is the goal of comprehensive final exam- 

sent motor learning hold that (1) correct practice 
inations. By now you should also understand that 

improves performance and supports learning and 
performance in retention and transfer is the goal 

(2) augmented feedback enhances practice and 
of most genuine efforts at learning. Therefore, 

thereby learning. These principles were selected 
the variables that affect retention and transfer are 

for several reasons. First, the variables they empha- 
important to motor learning. Confusion can arise 

size—practice and feedback—are treated at length 
from the fact that everything we see ourselves 

in many motor learning textbooks (e.g., Fischman, 
doing is performance, but some of what we see is 

2007). Furthermore, these are likely the two most 
also based on learning. Performance can be influ- 

widely studied variables in motor learning, and 
enced by variables that do not influence learning. 

scholars agree that they are the two most important 
Still, performance variables can hold interest for 

variables in motor learning (Schmidt et al., 2019). 
motor learning students and scholars, as you will 

Indeed, two of our favorite historical adages for 
see later in this chapter. 

motor learning are “practice is a necessary but not 
sufficient condition for learning” and “practice the 

Overview of Knowledge results of which are known makes perfect.” Both of 
these evidence-based truths indicate that practice 

in Motor Behavior and feedback are independently important variables, 

Now let us look at what motor behavior research- and the relationship between them is also important. 

ers have learned from years of study. Our goal is 
not to cover all of motor behavior but to present 

eh 
six major principles that are well supported in the 
motor behavior literature. These principles are based Motor learning is an internal state that is relatively 

on research using the measurement and methods permanent; practice is required in order for it to occur, 

outlined in the previous section; they also represent and it is difficult to observe and measure. Thus, transfer 
evidence-based application of the field in many and retention tests are used to measure learning. 
kinesiology careers. These principles come from 
the goals of motor behavior presented earlier in the 
chapter. In motor control, research and theory about Consider why these variables are important 

development and learning were formed around a for you. Assuming that transfer occurs from one 

concept of how the brain and central nervous system learning situation to another—for example, from 

work to create movements. We briefly describe that learning a motor skill to learning the content in 

concept before presenting the principles. anatomy—understanding how to practice for learn- 

To help scientists conceptualize the brain as the ing could be helpful. As you move toward a career, 

master controller in planning, organizing, selecting, even if you are not a teacher, you will no doubt 

and controlling movements, a model called informa- be called on to help someone learn something, 

tion processing was adopted. This model represents and understanding how to do so will be to your 

the motor behavior system as a computer. In this advantage. For example, you might need to lead an 

view, general commands are sent from the brain exercise class or teach an employee how to do his 

(the central processing unit, or CPU) through the or her job, or you might want to help your child 
as he or she learns a new skill. Physical therapists 

spinal cord (the wiring), which probably reduces the 
complexity of the information into relatively simple and occupational therapists also teach clients to 

perform tasks. Thus, understanding how we learn 
commands, and on to the muscles or muscle groups 

(the printer or screen). (If your brain were really motor skills is critical in many fields. 



me 156 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Recall that the study of motor learning is an 

effort to explain and predict conditions that will 

make skill acquisition easier or faster and make 

learning more permanent. Such conditions include 

individual differences between learners, such as 

speed of movement and coordination. Task differ- 
ences are also important conditions in skill acqui- 
sition because tasks may be either more open (e.g., 
batting) or more closed (e.g., bowling). Learning 
may also be affected by environmental conditions, 
such as practice, feedback (intrinsic and extrin- 

sic), and transfer. Another way of thinking about 

the changes in movement during learning is that 
the portion that is automatic increases; that is, 
more of the movement becomes preprogrammed 
(Albers et al., 2005). At the same time, less of the 
movement remains under sensory control, that is, 
sensory information exerts less influence on how 
the movement is performed. More about this idea is 
presented in the section on motor control. The idea 
of automatic or learned skill is especially important 
in the study of experts because automatic perfor- 
mance allows the expert to focus on the strategy 
and not the execution of the skill. 

At this point, you might wonder how we know 
when something is learned. Clearly, that is a challenge 
for motor learning research, theory, and application. 

The adage “You have to crawl before you can walk” is a 
Whereas learning involves the relatively perma- 

good way to think of skill acquisition—an orderly process 
nent acquisition of a skill, performance involves 

that sometimes leads to falls! 
the degree to which someone can demonstrate that 

© Human Kinetics 
skill at any given time. In other words, performance 
is the current observable behavior—a snapshot of 
what the learner is doing right now. Sometimes 

The skill acquisition process constitutes an performance reflects learning, as when a player can 
orderly progression. The learner begins by making demonstrate a newly acquired skill. At other times, 
many large errors while trying to understand the it does not. For instance, most of us have had the 
task. The cognitive demands are great in the early experience of turning in an examination and then 
stages of learning; in fact, the task may be more remembering an answer that we knew but were 
cognitive than motor (Adams, 1987; Fitts & Posner, unable to put on the paper during the exam. We 
1967; Gentile, 1972). With practice, the errors would argue that we had learned the material but 
become more consistent; that is, rather than making just could not produce it for the examination! In 
a different error on each trial, performers make the such a case, we are saying that performance does 
same errors repeatedly. At this point, the demands not represent learning. Thus, a single measure of 
are less cognitive and more motor oriented, and the performance may not indicate much about learning 
errors are smaller and less frequent. Thus, response without other performance measures over time. 
execution is improving. Once the learner can exe- One way to distinguish between performance 
cute the skill with fewer and smaller errors and no and learning variables is to remember that per- 
longer has to think about the skill while performing formance variables produce a temporary effect, 
it, then the skill is considered learned or automatic. whereas learning variables produce a relatively 
Now, instead of thinking about what each body part permanent effect. Knowing the difference between 
is doing (response execution), the performer can these effects is a critical part of motor learning. 
think about strategy or about the opponent when For instance, you might have trouble typing a term 
deciding which response to select and execute. paper after working late into the night and getting 



Chapter 6 |M otor Behavior 

very tired. Yet the next day, after getting some rest, ated with better performance and is required for 
you might be able to type rapidly while making learning. However, it must be organized differently 
few errors. In this case, fatigue depressed your depending on whether the objective is performance 
performance, but you had learned the keyboarding (short-term) or learning (ong-term). Has anyone 
skills through practice and could demonstrate this (e.g., teacher, coach) ever said to you, “Oh, come 
learning once you were rested. on, it’s easy,” when you were struggling to learn a 

new skill? Hearing that remark can be maddening, 
because performing the skill is not easy for you at 

SAS EN ee ee that stage of learning. Practice that leads to learn- 
Because motor performance can be influenced by ing takes hard work with many errors, and good 

variables such as fatigue, the best measure of motor teachers and coaches understand this principle of 

learning involves tests of retention and transfer. motor learning. In your motor learning class, you 
will study practice in two phases, before-practice 
variables and during-practice variables. 

Because performance does not always reflect 
learning, researchers prefer to measure learning Before Practice 

with retention and transfer tests (Brady, 2008; * Goal setting (Locke & Latham, 2016) 
Christina, 2017). In sport, retention refers to how 

¢ Instructions 
much of a skill a performer can demonstrate after 
a period of no practice. One example of retention * Demonstrations or modeling (Ashford et al., 

is being able to type after a vacation during which 2006; McCullagh, 1993) 

you didn’t type; another example is being able to ¢ Mental practice 

swim at the beginning of the summer after having 
learned to swim during the previous summer but During Practice 
not having swum during the winter. Transfer tests, 

¢ Scheduling of practice 
on the other hand, require that you use the infor- 
mation in a different way from how you originally ¢ Context of practice (Perreault & French, 

practiced the skill—for example, using a principle 2015; Schmidt & Lee, 2020). 

from physics to solve a biomechanical problem. Once you have completed a motor learning 
Transfer can be manifested in various ways—for course, you will understand the prepractice vari- 
example, a stroke patient transferring walking skills ables and how to schedule and organize practice. 
learned in clinic to outside environments, or using Some of these variables are presented here in the 
experience in throwing a baseball when throwing sidebar titled Example of Practice Organization. 
a javelin for the first time. For instance, constant practice involves doing the 

same thing over and over, whereas variable practice 
Practice involves not doing the same thing on consecutive 
Practice, of course, involves repetition, but there practice trials. The first step in practice planning is 
is more to understanding its importance than to consider the learner and the skill; the next step 
mere repetition. More practice is usually associ- is to plan the appropriate type of practice. 

Research and Evidence-Based Practice in Kinesiology 
Visual Cues in Skill Rehabilitation 

Gomez-Jordana, Stafford, Peper, and Craig (2018) demonstrated that virtual footprints presented in 

an immersive, interactive virtual reality (VR) environment can significantly improve walking perfor- 

mance (i.e., step length, cadence, and step velocity) in participants with Parkinson's disease (PD). 

Their analysis showed clear improvements in the PD patients for all virtual cueing conditions, in 

particular with respect to step length, step velocity, and overall gait variability. Step length (smaller 

steps) is a common negative change associated with PD; this study suggests that the neural 

mechanisms behind the control of selfeaced movement (e.g., walking) improve when external 

stimuli (e.g., virtual footsteps) are present. 



ag 158 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Example of Practice Organization 

Your sister has asked you to teach your 7-year-old nephew to swim. He remembers choking after 

inhaling water when he was younger and has avoided swimming lessons ever since. Fortunately, 

he looks up to you and is willing to give it another try. Unfortunately, you have not taught swimming 

before. Therefore, you face an important challenge, and you realize that in order to succeed you 

need to do some planning. 
At this point, you know that practice and feedback are important to learning. We can consider 

planning practice in three parts: prepractice, practice, and postpractice. During practice, you also 

need to think about feedback. We know that our participant is a novice. What kind of skill is swim- 

ming? Good descriptors include continuous and relatively closed. As you plan the first practice 

session, consider what the learner is thinking, what you (as the teacher) are thinking, and what 

you should say. The process is demonstrated in the following table. 

The nephew thinks: The teacher thinks: The teacher says: 

Prepractice (goal “lam afraid. This is “| should set a goal, demon- “It’s okay to be afraid; you're 

setting, simple going to be hard. | will strate, and keep my instructions smart to be afraid. The only 

instructions, probably fail.” simple.” way not to be afraid is to 
modeling) learn to swim. So today | want 

you to see how the water 
holds me up.” (The teacher 
demonstrates a float.) “To 
float, you must put your face 
in the water. Once you get 
your face wet, then we will 
work until you keep your face 
in the water for 5 seconds.” 

Practice “So far, so good—he’s not chok- “That was great—you had 
(constant prac- ing, and his face is in the water. your face in the water for 5 
tice, contextual Short practice trials with rest in seconds. |’m proud of you. 
practice, blocked between are working. | should Next time, | want you to get 
practice, extrin- show him what | want him to do. your ears wet too, so put your 
sic feedback) | can give him feedback when he face in far enough to get your 

comes up for air.” ears wet. | Know you can do 
it! Let me show you what | 
want.” (The teacher demon- 
strates.) 

Postpractice “That wasn’t so bad. | “Next, | need to increase the “You're making progress. 
(verbal can put my face in the difficulty, but | also need to let Now we'll practice walking in 
rehearsal, goal water for 5 seconds, him rest so that he doesn’t get the water, and then we'll try 
setting) and | didn’t choke. | fatigued and make a mistake.” putting your face in again. 

could feel the water in Can you tell me what you’ve 
my ears.” accomplished so far?” 

“| put my face and ears “Good. You know, it took a lot 
in the water.” of practice before | learned 

to swim. If we keep working, 
you'll learn to swim just like 
| did.” 



Chapter 6] Motor Behavior 

A few days later, the practice continues, as demonstrated in the following table. 

The nephew thinks: The teacher thinks: The teacher says: 

Prepractice (goal “So far, this is easy. “He puts his face in the water, walks in “Today you're ready for 
setting, demon- __|’m pretty good at the water, and can do each of the parts something new. You 
stration, verbal this. | can put my face (float, kick, and arms). | think he’s ready know how to count to 
rehearsal) in the water, walk in to begin to swim. So, | want to provide three, and there are only 

the water, and float.” verbal cues that he can rehearse and three things you need 
use for the progressive part of practice.” to remember and do to 

swim: (1) Put your face 
in the water and float, 
(2) kick your feet, and (3) 
move your arms. Let me 
show you while you count 
for me.” (The teacher 
demonstrates.) “What 
do 1, 2, and 3 stand for? 
Now it’s your turn.” 

Practice (blocked “Okay, 1 is face in to “He did it! Now we need to repeat this “Good job. You did all 
practice, extrin- float, 2 is kick, and 3 several times with just a little rest three. Now do it again.” 
sic feedback is arms.” between. Should | change the practice? (Repeat several times.) 
after several Let’s see—this is a closed continuous “You're going about 10 
trials) skill, So constant practice is okay. Maybe feet [3 meters] before you 

we should practice in a different pool or stand up. That’s good. 
at least a different place in this pool next You're working very hard. 
time.” Let’s see if you can go a 

bit farther. From where you 
are to where I’m standing 
is about 12 feet [3.5 
meters]. Try to get to me. 
I’m sure you can do it!” 

Postpractice “I’m totally awesome. “He’s swimming. We've made a lot of “You reached the goal— 
(mental and 1, face in and float; 2, progress, but I’m worried that the prog- good work! Now say 
verbal rehearsal, kick; 3, arms.” ress will slow down. | need to keep him the three steps for me. 

extrinsic feed- motivated.” Good. Can you think of 

back) the way it feels as you 
say the steps? Think 
about this and say the 
steps before next time.” 

Feedback—Knowledge a result of a movement. Extrinsic feedback (also 
called augmented feedback) consists of information 

of Results and Performance 
provided by an outside source, such as a referee, 

As you may have experienced, feedback is an judge, teacher, coach, or video recording. 
integral part of the practice regimen that leads to 
learning. In fact, one cannot learn a skill correctly 
without feedback. It guides the learner toward EeKEYSr ON eee  
performing the task correctly and reinforces cor- 

Knowledge of performance is about the process of 
rect performance. Feedback can be intrinsic or 

movement and is important for beginners. Knowledge 
extrinsic. Intrinsic feedback consists of information 

about performance that you obtain for yourself as of results is about the outcome of a movement. 



Ma 160 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Besides distinguishing between intrinsic and was one key away from the correct initial position 

extrinsic feedback, motor behaviorists also cate- on the home row. A beginner typist, however, might 

gorize extrinsic feedback as either knowledge of need a cue (e.g., “Check your home position”) to 

results (KR) or knowledge of performance (KP). correct the error; this typist is using KP feedback. 
While KR and KP have very specific meanings The ultimate goal of feedback is to help per- 
in experiments, the distinction between them is formers detect and correct their own errors. The 
probably arbitrary in other contexts. The role of study of feedback has focused on KP and KR with 
extrinsic feedback in learning is to provide accurate regard to frequency (how often), precision (how 
information that the performer cannot provide for detailed), modality (auditor, kinesthetic, or other 

herself. In experiments on KR and KP, outcome source), and processing time. Feedback can also be 
information may be hidden from the performer either reinforcing (e.g., “That was a good effort”) or 
in order to reveal underlying factors or negate negative (e.g., “You did not try very hard”), which 
experience; in sport and physical activity, however, are equally good. 
outcomes are rarely hidden from the performer. 
As its name implies, knowledge of results consists 
of information about the result of a movement— KEY 20 
for example, “You missed the target.” The athlete Extrinsic feedback contains information that the 
can see the ball missing the target, so KR from learner could not obtain alone, should be corrective 
a coach or teacher is not necessary or helpful. and provided for about half of the trials, and must be 
KP focuses on the performance and issues like followed by sufficient time to make corrections before 
angle, speed or force, acceleration or deceleration, 

trying again. 
starting or ending location, and so forth. Early in 
the process of learning motor skills, KP is critical 
and is provided by a coach or teacher; thus, it is Frequency of feedback can be addressed in 
extrinsic. As skill develops, the performer may terms of the percentage of practice trials for which 
detect performance information and begin to use feedback is given (e.g., 50 percent or every other 
that information to correct errors and to repeat trial versus 100 percent or all trials). On the sur- 
correct movements. Figure 6.3 presents examples face, more feedback might seem to be better, but 
of intrinsic and extrinsic feedback. For instance, a performers can become dependent when feedback 
good typist who is told that he keyed in “Hybe” is too frequent. Constant feedback is also counter- 
instead of “June” would know that his right hand productive if the goal is to detect and correct one’s 

Knowledge of performance 
Extrinsic feedback 

Knowledge of results 
Nice job of setting up. Extrinsic feedback 
Could you release the ball 
even quicker? The runner 

is out! 

Intrinsic feedback Intrinsic feedback 

That throw Right on the money. 
felt good. She's out! 

GTTSEY Four kinds of feedback for a shortstop. 



Chapter 6| Motor Behavior 

own errors, because it prevents one from learning seconds versus 160 milliseconds). The example also 
the processes of detection and correction. Thus, demonstrates how critical advance information is to 
KP should be given more often at the beginning successful performance—in this case, whether the 
of learning and then gradually reduced (Salmoni pitcher is likely to throw a fastball or a breaking 
et al., 1984); this process is often referred to as ball, as well as the likely pitch location. Thus, you 
Jading the feedback. may hear a baseball commentator say, “Three balls, 

In your study of motor behavior, you will learn one strike; he’ll be looking for a fastball high and 
about two other variables in motor learning besides inside” (i.e., a certain pitch in a specific location). 
KP and KR—precision and modality of feedback. The batter is trying to reduce the decision to a 
You are also likely to learn about the amount of go or no-go situation—he’ll swing if the pitch is 
time that children need in order to use feedback. what he expects—rather than having to consider 

In baseball, the batter watches the pitcher for all possible options. The batter can do this because 
critical information that may give a clue about the in this situation he can decide not to swing even 
pitch. In doing so, the batter ignores the crowd’s if the pitch is a strike (because another strike will 
yelling and tries to gather only relevant advance not make an out). If the count were three balls and 
information about the pitch and where to hit it. two strikes, then the batter would be less likely to 
Figure 6.4 provides an example of how long the look for a specific pitch. 
batter has to make decisions about swinging the 
bat after the pitcher releases the ball. The figure Motor Control 
demonstrates that a batter has more decision time 

The first principle of motor control holds that the 
(150 milliseconds versus 130 milliseconds) if he 

waits longer and speeds up the swing (140 milli- brain uses the central nervous system to initiate 

eS 

0 100 200 300 400 500 
Time (ms) 

Decision making Implementing decision Movement 
460 ms . 

Pitch QQ 

Slow 
swing 

Fast 
swing 

| Ball leaves 130 150 300 320 460 ; 

_ pitcher’s hand Batter’s decision ends Swing begins Ball arrives at plate 

—- £4 = 

Gene Time line showing the critical events in hitting a pitched baseball. The movement time is 160 milli 
seconds for the slow swing and 140 milliseconds for the fast swing. 

Reprinted by permission from R.A. Schmidt and T.D. Lee, Motor Learning and Performance: From Principles to Application, 6th ed. (Champaign, IL: Human 

Kinetics, 2020), 145. 



Me 162 Introduction to Kinesiology 

and control the muscles that make the desired Some researchers, however, do not agree with 

movements. The second principle of motor control the idea of motor programs drawn from schema 

holds that one goal of most movements is to rely theory, and they have proposed another theory. 

on the decision-making centers in the brain as little This approach, referred to as dynamical systems 

as possible once the movement is initiated. These theory (Fischman, 2007; Haken et al., 1985; Kelso, 

two principles were developed on the basis of two 1995), suggests a more direct and less cognitive link 
theories and many research studies. One of these between motor action and information picked up 
theories focuses on what are called motor programs by the perceptual system. This direct link is called 
and the other on dynamical systems. Motor pro- a coordinated structure, one characteristic of which 

grams (Schmidt, 1975) provide a theoretical expla- is automated movement that relies on very little 
nation of how we produce and control movements. decision making or central control in the brain. 
We can compare a motor program to a computer 
program that does math problems. First, you select 
the program to use; this is response selection. The 1e3M s!)|, |ee ee 
program can add, subtract, multiply, and divide. Exciting and controversial results are likely to be pro- 
If you input the relevant numbers and indicate duced by research that contrasts predictions and key 
which math operations to perform, the program elements of the motor program view of motor behavior 
outputs the answer; this is response execution. A with those of the dynamical systems view. 
motor program operates in the same way. First, 

you select the program (response selection) and 
indicate what it should do (operations). Then the You may be wondering which theory—motor 
program specifies how to do the skill and sends program or dynamical systems—more accurately 
signals through the spinal cord to the muscles that represents the process of motor control. One 
perform the movement (response execution). decisive test for theories of motor control is to 

At a minimum, a motor program must do the examine how well they explain motor learning and 
following five things (Schmidt & Lee, 2020): the development of motor expertise (Abernethy 

et al., 1993). You will have a chance to examine 
¢ Specify the muscles involved in the action. 

and compare these theories in your motor learn- 
¢ Select the order of muscle involvement. ing class—and perhaps help advance them if you 
e Determine the force of muscle contractions. choose to pursue graduate study in motor control. 

¢ Specify the relative timing and sequences The study of motor control addresses five areas 
of contractions. (Rosenbaum, 2010): 

¢ Determine the duration of contractions. 1. Degrees of freedom—coordination 

2. Motor equivalency 

7eRCE LOIN e 3. Serial order of movements—coarticulation 

A motor program is a proposed memory mechanism 4. Perceptual integration during movement 

that allows us to control movements. As motor pro- 5. Skill acquisition 

grams are developed, they become more automatic, 
The brain initiates the planning of movements, 

thus allowing us to concentrate on using movement in 
and the nervous system then sends signals through 

performance situations. the spinal cord to the muscles, which in turn make 
the movements. What is not known is how the 

If we had to remember how exactly to create brain represents the information to be sent to the 

every single movement we execute, our memo- muscles. The study of motor control is an effort to 

ries would be overloaded. Thus, motor programs understand what the brain, nervous system, and 

explain why we do not have a central storage prob- muscles are doing to direct movementsJu.s t as skill 

lem for the great diversity of movement skills we acquisition—including the notions of learning and 

use. Instead of storing in memory each movement improvement—is the focus of the study of motor 

that we have ever done, we store groups of move- learning, it is critical in the study of motor control 

ments with similar characteristics. These groups, as well. Indeed, skill acquisition accentuates the 

called schemata, serve as the foundation of motor relationship between motor learning and motor 

program theory (Schmidt, 1975). control. 



Chapter 6| Motor Behavior 163 

Once again, you may be wondering why under- 
standing motor control is important. The answer 
is clear for professionals in physical education, 
physical therapy, or athletic training: Anyone who 
wants to learn or teach a skill uses the principles 
of motor control by trying to use the simplest 
movement possible at the early stages of learning. 
Moreover, some of what you will learn about motor 
control is not very intuitive, and thus it is often 
misunderstood by those who are untrained. 

For example, consider the baseball batting exam- 
ple from figure 6.4. Here, motor control research 
tells us that the most rapid adjustments are made 
when we are not thinking about the flight of the 
pitch or the swing of the bat. That is, we turn con- 
trol of the skill over to a more automatic part of the 
system called ambient vision. This process can be 
explained equally well by either of the two theories 
of motor control. However, the idea of automatic 
responses is not well understood by many sport 
enthusiasts. For instance, when you hear coaches 
or parents say, “Watch the ball all the way to the 
bat,” you know that they do not understand eye 
movements for tracking high-speed objects or how 
best to use the sensory system (ambient vision) 
in order to make rapid and accurate adjustments. 

We hear comments alluding to the shift from 
central (decision-making) control of movements 
to peripheral (or sensory) control when athletes 
say things like, “It just felt right.” The most rapid 
and accurate corrections are made when most of 
the movement is preprogrammed and sensory 
information is integrated only when necessary 
at the very end of the movement. In the study of Understanding the theories of motor control enables this 

motor control, this issue is a perceptual-motor therapist to help her elderly client relearn balance skills. 

integration problem: How do we best use sensory © Human Kinetics 

information to control movements? Rapid adjust- 
ments, like those of the baseball bat swing, might 
be explained by positing either that the information 
is not processed, which eliminates decision-making Developmental Motor Learning 
time (e.g., reaction time), or that there is no com- and Control 
petition between responses (Wyble & Rosenbaum, 

The two principles of motor development (devel- 
2016). The idea is that the demands are reduced to 

opmental learning and control) hold that (1) 
the simplest cases possible, thereby increasing the 

children are not miniature adults and (2) children 
speed of adjustments. More choices or complexity 

are more alike than different (Thomas & Thomas, 
decreases speed. 

2008). After watching a baby and a child perform 
Motor control scientists try to explain what 

they observe, but they do not always agree on the a motor task, you can see clear differences and 
similarities related to age. Infants demonstrate more 

explanation! We continue working to understand 

motor control because the range of motor skill random movements, have a smaller repertoire of 
movements, and tend to do the same movement 

performance—from normal to expert—depends 

on the shift from learning (central control, practice, 
repeatedly. In contrast, children have a larger reper- 
toire of motor skills, perform more voluntary skills, 

and feedback) to more automatic movements pro- 

grammed ahead of time and controlled peripherally. 
and exhibit greater skill than infants (Seefeldt & 



ag 164 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Haubenstricker, 1982) but less than adults. Thus, of her height, whereas an adult’s head accounts 

children’s movements are not scaled-down ver- for only one-eighth of her height. The legs also 

sions of adult movements. One explanation for change dramatically during childhood. At birth, 

the relative inefficiency of children’s movements the legs typically account for less than one-third of 

as compared with those of adults may be their lack body length; in adulthood, leg length often makes 

of practice. In addition, adults probably select and up more than half of body length. These physical 

plan movements—which is a cognitive process— characteristics influence balance and locomotion. 

better than children do. Another factor in motor behavior is growth. 
Females grow until about 13 or 14 years of age, 
and males grow until 18 to 20 years. However, in 

SeREY PON 2 e motor learning studies with adults, growth is not a 

To study physical activity, you must understand factor. Children grow in three physical dimensions: 

the physiology, biomechanics, and motor behavior overall size, proportions (e.g., leg length, shoulder 
breadth, chest depth), and body composition (e.g., 

underlying the development of movement in order to 
muscle increase). Growth influences motor perfor- 

address problems such as how children gain control 
mance, partly because children must contend with 

of movement skills. 
the changes in their bodies—an issue that adults 
do not have to deal with to such a large degree. 

Studying children is valuable because they typ- Adult—child differences can also help explain child- 

ically change in an orderly fashion, and the order child differences. For example, size and strength 

of change is the same across children even though have a positive relationship in that larger children 

the rate varies. Hence, the second principle—that are generally stronger; therefore, as children grow, 

children are fundamentally alike—refers to gender, the increase in size produces increases in strength. 

culture, and developmental age. When we under- However, strength also increases due to neuro- 

stand how motor skills develop and what factors muscular efficiency. Because physical growth lies 

influence development, we can make predictions. beyond our control, we must understand how it 

Those predictions are important to pediatricians, influences performance in order to accommodate 

teachers, and parents. the challenges that it brings. 

Virtually all the questions in motor learning 
and motor control can be studied as part of motor Life Span Development 

development by examining the same questions In addition to addressing the effects of growth on 
across age. In addition, some unique problems motor performance, the study of developmental 
arise in studying infants, children, and persons motor learning and control also deals with the 
who are elderly. For instance, children differ from effects of aging on motor performance. As a result, 
adults in several ways, including physical growth, this area of study is sometimes referred to as life 
information processing, experience, and neurolog- span development (Spirduso & MacRae, 1990; 
ical development (Thomas et al., 2001). Stelmach & Nahom, 1992). In the course of the life 

Although some topics are unique to devel- span, changes in strength and motor coordination 
opmental motor learning and control, consider- are most rapid at the extremes of the age contin- 
able overlap occurs with the two goals of motor uum. Growth is less important after adolescence 
behavior mentioned previously—motor learning because the changes in physical parameters are 
and motor control (Ulrich, 2007). In some univer- less dramatic in adults and elderly people than in 
sity programs, motor development is part of the infants and young children. 
course on motor learning and control, whereas in Cognitive processes also change during child- 
other universities the classes are separate. Motor hood, both because of the developing nervous 
development also includes several topics that are system and because of experience. Children use 
not part of motor learning—for example, physical fewer cognitive processes and use them less effec- 
growth and youth sport. tively than adults do. For example, when asked to 

remember a movement, a 5-year-old child might 
Developmental Changes “put on his thinking cap”—not a very effective strat- 
in the Mechanics of Movement egy for remembering a movement. A 7-year-old, on 
The mechanics of a movement differ at different the other hand, might do the movement repeatedly, 
ages, in part because the skill is being executed whereas a 12-year-old might repeat the movement 

by bodies of different sizes and proportions. For in a series composed of several movements. Adults 
example, a baby’s head accounts for one-quarter and older children know that they must do some- 



Chapter 6] Motor Behavior 165 

thing to learn and remember movements, whereas see a pattern similar to that of childhood—namely, 
younger children might not recognize the impor- a relationship between physical growth factors 
tance of deliberate practice, or they might choose (e.g., muscle), practice, and performance. 
an ineffective practice regimen. One reason for the Task performance by elderly persons can be neg- 
growing interest in cognitive processing during atively affected by nervous system deterioration. As 
motor skill acquisition in children is that the strat- people age, they lose neurons in the brain and motor 
egies used by adults can be taught to children in neurons in muscles. These changes result in slow- 
order to improve their performance. In other words, ness and variability in movement control. On the 
this research can enhance teaching. other hand, older people benefit from experience 

and can use it to compensate for a loss of speed, 
Experience strength, and control. Understanding such changes 
As noted earlier, experience is a factor in children’s in the central nervous system is important because 
performance. Of course, in situations where expe- we have little opportunity to accelerate or decelerate 
rience is helpful, those who are elderly may have them; if we live long enough, we are likely to face 
an advantage, whereas many children have a disad- some decrement in the central nervous system. 

vantage due to lack of experience. However, we can 
enhance experiences for children, and we can do so 
in two ways—quality and quantity. Research shows -RECPOIN 
that children with experience can outperform adults One key developmental question regarding motor 
with less experience, which means that practice behavior addresses how the brain and nervous system 
and experience can help children (Chi & Koeske, adjust to increases in cognitive function, body size, and 
1983). This finding carries clear implications for strength during childhood and to decreases in those 
pedagogy and curriculum development. Curriculum 

variables as people age. 
and instruction need to provide experience in order 
to enhance sport performance in children. Further- 
more, we can improve the quality of experience by Motor control issues are also important in devel- 
using what we know about information processing opmental learning and control. Although the critical 
to help children get more out of practice. The key is issues here are similar to those discussed in the 
that children need practice, and for it to be effective, previous section on motor control (for a review, 
it must help them retain information, skill, and deci- see Clark & Phillips, 1991), there is one additional 
sion-making ability that they would normally lose. question: How does growth become integrated into 
We can enable this type of experience by providing the motor control system? As previously mentioned, 
children with adult learning strategies. children can change very rapidly, particularly at 

puberty (Malina, 1984; Malina et al., 2004). How 
Changing Neuromuscular Systems does the motor control system account for changes 
Children differ from adults in terms of neurology, in size, proportion, and mass? Consider a boy who 
or what we might think of as neural hardware played baseball from March until July at age 12. 
(analogous to a computer with its disk drives and By the following March, he is 13 years old, he has 
monitor). In addition, as adults age, their neuro- grown 4 inches (10 centimeters) in height, his 
muscular hardware changes; sarcopenia (loss of arms have grown in length, and he weighs more. 
skeletal muscle), a slowing of the nervous system, Moreover, he has not practiced batting or throwing 
and reduced physical activity can all affect both since the preceding season, yet he can still bat and 
health and performance in older adults. You may throw successfully. How does his nervous system 
have seen older adults (generally, 65 or older) compensate for his physical changes in order to 
moving like toddlers with their arms extended and continue producing coordinated movements? 
taking slow, wide steps. This movement pattern At the other end of the age continuum, how does 
may result in part from physical inactivity due to a system of motor control that has functioned for 
injury, illness, or fear of falling. Older adults who many years using one set of parameters account 

continue to perform tasks, whether exercise or for losses in cognitive function, body mass, flexi- 

work related, tend to exhibit less decline than do bility, and strength? No good explanation has been 

those who stop performing as they age (Spirduso & found for these important issues in the develop- 

MacRae, 1990). Moreover, attaining, maintaining, or mental aspects of motor learning and control. Some 

regaining a physically active lifestyle predicts how progress, however, is being made (for reviews, see 

long an older adult is likely to remain independent Clark et al., 2019; Payne & Isaacs, 2017; Thomas 

(Rikli, 2005; Rikli & Jones, 2013). Thus, in aging, we et al., 2001). 



a 166 introduction to Kinesiology 

Growth and Gender in the Development Physical growth is rapid during infancy, constant 

of Overhand Throwing during childhood, and rapid during the growth 
spurt associated with puberty (Malina, 1984; Malina 

We have all seen examples of people of different ages et al., 2004). Children’s limbs grow more rapidly 
and genders who show markedly different physical than the torso and head, and the increase in pro- 
abilities. Can we document such differences? Why portion of total height attributed to leg length 
do they occur? To explore these questions, let’s look explains some of the improvement in running 
at what researchers have learned about overhand and jumping performance during childhood. In 
throwing. First, we need to examine physical growth addition, the shoulders and hips grow wider, and 
and development (see figure 6.5 for a summary of 

males’ shoulders become much broader on aver- 
growth in terms of stature and weight and figure 6.6 age than females’ shoulders, which gives males an 
for changes in proportion). Then we will see how 

advantage in certain activities, including throwing. 
these factors affect overhand throwing skills. 

The typical growth pattern supports the principle 
that children are not miniature adults. 

180 Growth is orderly and marked by increases in 
170 length, then breadth, and then circumferences (figure 
160 6.6 shows change in proportion from birth though 
150 adulthood). As a result, children in upper elementary 
140 school often look awkward because their legs and 
130 Stature 

arms appear to be long and skinny. After most of 
« 120 Sei | the final length of a limb has been attained, the limb 
S 410 ——= (Eis 

gains thickness as bone circumference and muscles 
100 (and fat!) increase, thus making the body look more 
90 70 

proportional. In other words, children fill out; in fact, 
80 60 

men’s shoulders and chests usually grow (bones and 
70 50 

muscle) until about 30 years of age, whereas most 
60 40 = 

women stop growing by their late teens. 
50 “Ops 

20 The changes produced by physical growth pres- 

10 ent three kinds of challenges: mechanical, adaptive, 

0 and absolute. The mechanics of movement change 
because of the different body proportions; the 

OIAZS4A5 O67 B OIA HIGIvi1s 
person must adapt to a rapidly changing body. 

Age (yr) 
These changes are especially problematic in sea- 

GTS Average height and weight curves for sonal sports. Consider a wrestler who experiences 
American boys and girls. a rapid growth spurt from the end of one season 
Adapted from R.M. Malina, “Physical Growth and Maturation,” in Motor to the beginning of the next. His center of gravity 
Development During Childhood and Adolescence, edited by J.R. Thomas has changed, which may influence his balance and 
(Minneapolis, MN: Burgess, 1984), 7. By permission of J.R. Thomas. 

2 mo. (fetal) 5 mo. Newborn 2yr 6 yr 12 yr 25 yr 

GIAIXI Changes in form and proportion of the human body during fetal and postnatal life. 
Adapted from K.M. Newell, “Physical Constraints to the Development of Motor Skills,” in Motor Development During Childhood and Adolescence, edited by 
J.R. Thomas (Minneapolis, MN: Burgess, 1984), 108. By permission of J.R. Thomas. 



Chapter 6| Motor Behavior 

the location of optimal points for exerting maximal 
force. Performance may also be influenced by abso- bee 
lute changes in size. Females gain fat at puberty, 135 
which adversely influences performance in most 110 
physical activities; in contrast, males gain muscle, 

85 
which exerts a positive influence on performance. 
In these ways, physical growth during childhood et 

D(fit)s tance 
interacts with all of the other factors that are devel- 35 
oping (e.g., motor programs) and therefore must 
be considered in both instruction and research. ie 

One good way to examine how structural and 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 
functional change influences skill across childhood Age (yr) 
and adolescence is to consider overhand throwing. 
Figure 6.7 shows the changes in throwing for dis- GUT Age differences in throwing for distance. 
tance that occur across childhood and adolescence Data from Espenschade (1960). 

Development of Body Actions During Throwing 

Level Body actions 

Preparatory 
arm backswing 

Level 1 The child’s hand moves directly forward to release from where the child first grasps the ball. 

Level 2 The forearm moves backward beside the head and then forward in ball release. 

Level 3 The ball moves backward with a circular and upward backswing with elbow flexion. 

Level 4 The ball moves backward with a downward swing below the waist and then up behind the 
head with elbow flexion. 

Arm action 

Level 1 The upper arm moves backward and forward at an angle to the body. The forearm is linked to 
the upper arm movement and does not lag behind it. 

Level 2 The upper arm is aligned with the shoulder and moves with it until near release, when the 
upper arm leads the shoulder. The forearm lags behind the upper arm (i.e., it appears to stay 
at the same point after the shoulder and upper arm have started forward). 

Level 3 The upper arm lags behind the shoulder as the forward movement of the arm begins. The 
forearm lags even farther behind the upper arm and shoulder, reaching its final point of lag 
as the body is front facing. 

Trunk action 

Level 1 Little or no trunk action occurs; the throw is accomplished byj ust the forward and backward 
action of the arm. 

Level 2 The trunk rotation is in one block; the spine and hips move together in one rotating action. 

Level 3 The hips lead in forward rotation folewed by the spine (differentiated rotation). 

Foot action 

Eevel 1 Feet do not move during throwing action. 

Level 2 Step occurs but with the foot on the same side as the throwing hand. 

Level 3 Step aeons but with the foot on the opposite side of the throwing hand. 

Level 4 Same as level 3 except that the step is longer (about one-half of standing height). 

Reprinted from M.A. Roberton, 1984, “Changing Motor Patterns During Childhood,” In Motor development during childhood and adolescence, edited 

by J.R. Thomas (Minneapolis, MN: Burgess Publishing), 75. By permission of J.R. Thomas. 



Ml 168 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Student Learning Demonstrates Teaching Skill 

How well did you do in planning swimming practice for your nephew? Compare the information 

presented in the sidebar titled Example of Practice Organization (earlier in this chapter) to the sec- 

tions on practice, feedback, and transfer. How can you judge whether practice sessions influence 

the learning of a skill? If, in the example in the sidebar, your nephew can do what you presented in 

the first lesson the next time you meet, then you have evidence of retention. Remember, however, 

that retention is just one measure of learning. What characteristics of practice might disguise 
whether skills are being learned? 

for girls and boys. The developmental nature of the Wrap-Up 
overhand throw across childhood and early adoles- 
cence is detailed in the sidebar titled Development Although the study of motor behavior has produced 

of Body Actions During Throwing. This description important knowledge for human behavior since the 

is separated into various body actions performed late 1800s, it only began to evolve as a significant 

during the throw (e.g., arm, trunk, foot). subdiscipline of kinesiology in the 1960s. 

Given that prepubescent boys and girls are Knowledge developed through motor behavior 

structurally similar, differences as large as those is important in many areas. Although we often 

observed in throwing are unusual. Thomas and think of it in terms of learning and control of sport 

French (1985) noted that gender differences in skills, our society depends on human movement in 

throwing at 5 years of age were three times as large many ways—from babies learning to use spoons 

as those for any of the other 20 tasks they reviewed. to surgeons using scalpels, pilots controlling air- 

Although it seems likely that these differences are planes, children using pencils and pens, dentists 

accounted for largely by practice, encouragement, using drills, and elderly persons working to remain 

and opportunities, throwing may be one of the independent. The study of motor behavior is aimed 

few motor skills in which biological factors play at understanding the development, learning, and 

a significant role in gender-specific performance control of these and other motor skills so that 
differences before puberty. Overall, however, we people can use them more effectively. 
see that although we are unique, we (males and Knowledge of motor behavior is essential to 
females) are more alike than different—both before numerous kinesiology professions such as physical 
and after puberty! therapy, occupational therapy, physical education, 

coaching, and working with children in community 
organizations (e.g., YMCA, YWCA, Boys & Girls 
Clubs). Your school probably offers at least one 
undergraduate course in motor learning, motor 
control, and motor development. 



Chapter 6| Motor Behavior 

MORE INFORMATION ON THE STUDY OF MOTOR BEHAVIOR 
Organizations 

American Geriatrics Society 

Canadian Society for Psychomotor Learning and Sport Psychology 
International Motor Development Research Consortium (-MDRC) 

International Society of Motor Control 

North American Society for the Psychology of Sport and Physical Activity 

Society for the Neural Control of Movement 

Society for Neuroscience 

Journals 

Human Movement Science 

Journal of Motor Behavior 

Journal of Motor Learning and Development 

Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology 

Kinesiology Review 

Motor Control 

Pediatric Exercise Science 

Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport 

BEV EWWEOU LS ON See ee tee ee eee eee 
1. How does the study of motor behavior differ from the psychology of sport? 

2. Explain the differences between motor learning and motor control in the field of motor 
behavior. 

3. Why is the change in motor learning and motor control across the life span important? 

4. Think about the practice issues discussed in this chapter, such as feedback, retention, transfer, 
goal setting, and scheduling. Choose a sport with which you are familiar, and discuss how 
practice characteristics would influence your planning if you were a coach. Pick a specific 
age group or performance level, such as high school, college, or professional coaching. 

5. Provide an example in which more difficult practice conditions result in better retention and 
transfer. Why does that happen? How could you plan practices to promote these benefits? 

6. Discuss when it might be best to provide either knowledge of performance or knowledge 
of results to a person learning a motor skill. 

Bi L—| KP ropel » Go to HKPrope! to complete the activities for this chapter. 



f 

Yes 7), 
inane il We oistene 

ee ~@ Hiers  

ao atone 
“vey bits they h 

4 ausig “hid flix + ‘ 
2 [eek i 

he ire 

a 

<- a.i7 Be 
s o 
a Ais 

7 < 1 ¢ 

' 
4 aeseg 5 (Bead 

=e 

' Gantry C4 

‘Tat = ae 

- 
i? ccf Big @ 
VSvew (een 6 



Sport and Exercise Psychology 
Robin S. Vealey 

In this chapter, we will ee 

e discuss what professionals do in sport and exercise psychology, = : 

e describe how sport and exercise ps) chology evolved within the fieldo f 
kinesiology, : : ee 

i
° explain how professionals iin  sporta nd.e xercise psychology engage |  

oe 
research and practice, seen 

e review what research tells ut sa bo rson lity, motivation, arousal ont : 
anxiety, and group processes in sport and ercise settings, and — 

e explain imagery, attentional focus, and mindfulness as.e u ee ofh ow 

mon skills. training isu sed iin  s t and exercise. ae 



Suppose that you are an elite swimmer poised on the starting block for the 50-meter — = = 
freestyle race at the Olympic trials. In the other lanes are the top swimmers in the country who, - 

“like you, have trained for years to hone their bodies into finely tuned physical 
machines—all in preparation 
for this moment. What are 
you thinking? Should you | 
even be thinking? Where is 
your attention focused? Do 
you have negative thoughts 
and fears about not perform- 
ing well, or do you feel a con- 

_fident excitement that you are 
ready to meet the challenge? 
Do you feel a relaxed inner 
calm or a feverish emotional 
intensity? You have prepared 
yourself physically for this 
moment by swimming hours 
and hours for miles and miles. 
~However, have you prepared 

yourself mentally? 

The psychologist William James wrote that “the body and mind are one, waiting to explode from 
greatest discovery ... is that human beings, by the platform for the performance of your life! 
changing the inner attitudes of their minds, can Of course, most of us will not compete in the 
change the outer aspects of their lives.” How true Olympic Games, but the mental aspects of physi- 
that is! Our participation in physical activity is cal activity will challenge us repeatedly as we go 
greatly influenced by our “inner attitudes,” or how through our lives. Consider the following situations 
we think about what we’re doing. This mental that you may encounter: 
aspect of physical activity provides the focus of 

* You take up mountain biking and are 
study in sport and exercise psychology. Specifi- 

amazed at how the activity enhances your 
cally, sport and exercise psychology focuses on 

self-esteem and confidence along with your 
the mental processes of humans as they engage 

physical health. 
in physical activity. 

If you’re the Olympic swimmer in the opening You begin an exercise program to enhance 

scenario, systematic training with a sport psy- your personal fitness, but you lack motiva- 

chology professional has prepared you to think tion and quit the program after 2 months. 

productively and to focus optimally at this crucial You enjoy your weekly pickleball league 
moment. Your mental practice has prepared you but feel very nervous when playing doubles 
to focus your attention on productive, energizing because you don’t want to let your partner 
thoughts instead of worries and distractions. You down. 
have also programmed your mind and body to As the coach of a local youth soccer team, 
respond automatically at your preferred level of you are deciding on the best ways to pro- 
emotional intensity. Thus, you have mastered the vide feedback and to structure practices for 
mental focus and the physical readiness that you children. 
need for your best performance, and now your 

mg 172 



Chapter 7 |S port and Exercise Psychology 173 

* You know that you need to attend your professionals are interested in how physical activity 
weekly shoulder rehabilitation session, but can help people to develop self-esteem and con- 
you lack motivation because you know some fidence or better ways to think about themselves. 
of the exercises and stretches will hurt. ABC helps us to remember that sport and exercise 

All of these examples illustrate the critical and psychology is the study of affect (emotions), behav- 

fascinating link between mind and body that is ior (actions), and cognitions (thoughts) related to 

inherent in physical activity. physical activity participation. 
This chapter discusses the psychology of phys- 

ical activity in relation to the two main areas of 

NSU LL 9c kinesiology: sport and exercise. Sport psychology 
and exercise psychology have developed into two 

Physical activity always involves the mind as well as the 
distinct areas of kinesiology. Sport psychology 

body. The mental aspect of physical activity is studied focuses more on the psychological aspects of com- 
by sport and exercise psychology professionals. petitive sport participation. Exercise psychology 

is devoted to the psychological aspects of fitness, 
exercise, health, and wellness. Because the two 

Why Use Sport areas are closely related and share a great deal of 

and Exercise Psychology? theoretical content, this chapter covers both. 

Sport and exercise psychology involves the study 
of human thought, emotion, and behavior in phys- ShEGPON 2 ee eee 
ical activity. You can think of sport and exercise Sport psychology and exercise psychology, as subdis- 
psychology as the study of the ABCs of physical ciplines of kinesiology, focus on the study of human 
activity. In this conception, A represents the term thought, emotion, and behavior in physical activity. 
affect, which means emotion. For example, the 
emotions of anxiety and anger are studied to see 
how they influence athletes’ performances. Emo- Although sport psychology and exercise psy- 
tional moods are influenced by exercise, which has chology constitute areas of study in kinesiology, 
been shown to decrease depression and enhance they also have close ties to psychology. Psychology 
feelings of well-being. is the science that deals with human thoughts, 

B stands for behavior. It is fascinating to examine feelings, and behaviors; in turn, sport and exercise 
why people behave differently from one another psychology deals with the thoughts, feelings, and 
when engaging in physical activity. That is, why behaviors of people involved in sport and exercise. 
are some people so committed to and persistent For example, researchers trying to understand why 
in their exercise routines? Why do some athletes people begin, persist in, or discontinue participa- 
train exhaustively to achieve excellence, whereas tion in fitness programs often apply motivational 
other talented athletes don’t work as hard and thus theories developed in the discipline of psychology. 
don’t reach their potential? 

Finally, C represents cognitions, which means 
thoughts. Sport and exercise psychology examines What Do Sport and Exercise 
how our cognitions (thoughts) influence and are Psychology Professionals Do? 
influenced by our participation in physical activity. 
For example, understanding why athletes choke Like all kinesiology professionals, sport and 

under pressure requires that we understand their exercise psychology professionals try to enhance 

thinking processes. Similarly, exercise psychology people’s experiences in physical activity. Moreover, 

Goals of Sport and Exercise Psychology 

>» To understand the social—psychological factors that influence people’s participation and 
performance in physical activity 

>» To understand the psychological effects derived from participation in physical activity 

> To enhance sport and exercise experiences for those who participate in physical activity 



ae 174 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Exploring the ABCs of Physical Activity 

Consider the following questions related to sport and exercise psychology: 

1. Recalling that we've defined physical activity as intentional and purposeful movement (chapter 

1), think of several forms of physical activity in which you participate. What is your motivation 

for performing each one? 

2. Has participation in physical activity influenced your character? If so, what was the activity, 

and how did it affect you? If not, why is it that participation has not influenced your character? 

3. Have you ever been involved in or watched any form of violence in sport? If so, what happened 
and why? What do you think caused the violence to occur? 

4. Why do you think so few Americans participate in habitual exercise when it has been clearly 

shown to enhance health and longevity? 

as in any subdiscipline of kinesiology, sport and training facility in Bradenton, Florida, staffs a Mental 
exercise psychology professionals work in many Conditioning program in which 13 sport psychology 
career areas. professionals work with athletes and teams. Some 

sport psychology consultants have established pri- 

University Teaching vate practices or businesses. 
The practice of sport psychology also extends 

and Research Positions beyond athletics. Sport psychology-trained con- 
Kinesiology professors of sport and exercise psy- sultants work with professionals in stressful jobs, 
chology at universities fulfill the multiple roles such as police officers, firefighters, surgeons, busi- 
of researcher, teacher, and service provider. For ness executives, and performing artists. Currently, 
instance, a kinesiology professor specializing in the U.S. Army is the nation’s largest employer of 
exercise psychology might develop theory and con- sport psychology professionals; they help soldiers 
duct research on the psychological benefits of aer- to learn the mental skills they need to focus and 
obic exercise, teach courses in exercise psychology, control their bodies and minds during combat 
develop a health promotion program at the univer- situations and in the aftermath of combat. A sport 
sity, and conduct workshops for the community on psychology consultant can achieve distinction as a 
motivation and stress management. A kinesiology Certified Mental Performance Consultant (CMPC), a 
professor specializing in sport psychology, on the nationally accredited certification for professionals 
other hand, might conduct research on stress in in sport psychology. 
sport and athlete burnout, teach courses in sport An exercise psychology specialist might focus on 
psychology, consult with athletes from the uni- worksite health promotion for a large corporation, 
versity and the surrounding community, and offer develop fitness and wellness programs for a commu- 
regional workshops on coaching effectiveness. nity recreation department, or coordinate physical 

activity programs for all age groups through a YMCA. 

Consultants or Service-Provider Roles Some professionals in sport and exercise psychology 
become consultants for sports medicine or physical 

Some kinesiologists trained in sport and exercise 
therapy clinics to help injured people through the 

psychology focus more exclusively on practitioner or 
psychological aspects of injury rehabilitation. 

service-provider roles. A sport psychology specialist 
It is important to distinguish between exercise 

might work for a professional sport team, a national 
or sport psychology professionals who are trained 

sport program such as the United States Olympic 
as physical activity specialists and those who are 

Committee or U.S. Soccer, a university athletic 
trained as clinical or counseling psychologists. 

department, or a private sport training academy to 
Physical activity specialists focus on education or 

help athletes develop mental skills to perform more 
the teaching of skills to enhance performance and 

effectively. For example, 29 of 30 Major League Base- 
personal development in those who are involved in 

ball teams employ sport psychology consultants (a sport or exercise. Clinical and counseling psychol- 
total of 63 professionals employed in 2021) to help ogists, on the other hand, are licensed to provide 
players perform better and meet the challenges of 

psychotherapy and consultation for people with 
the sport and lifestyle. IMG Academy, a multisport 

clinical conditions such as depression, phobias, 



Chapter 7 |S port and Exercise Psychology 

and anorexia nervosa. Although some clinical and exerted social influence on motor performance, a 
counseling psychologists provide services for ath- research area that later became known as social 
letes and exercisers, the main focus of their practice facilitation. The first person to examine these social 
differs from that of sport and exercise psychology influences was Norman Triplett, who in 1898 stud- 
as a subdiscipline of the physical activity field. ied the effects of the presence of other people on 

bicycling performance. The effects of exercise on 
depression were reported a few years later (Franz 

ANS NC & Hamilton, 1905). 
Career opportunities in sport and exercise psychology Coleman Griffith engaged in the first systematic 

include positions as university professors, sport psy- examination of the psychological aspects of sport 

chology consultants, and fitness and health promotion in the 1920s and 1930s. Griffith established the 

specialists. Athletic Research Laboratory at the University of 
Hlinois, published numerous research articles, and 
wrote two classic books, Psychology of Coaching 

History of Sport (1926) and Psychology and Athletics (1928). Grif- 
fith also interviewed sport celebrities such as Red 

and Exercise Psychology Grange and Knute Rockne about the mental aspects 
of their sports. In 1938, Griffith was hired by Philip 

Throughout the history of physical education and Wrigley as a sport psychology consultant for the 
kinesiology, people have noted the connection Chicago Cubs. During this work, Griffith developed 
between physical activity and mental health. How- psychological profiles for specific players, including 
ever, sport and exercise psychology was not widely Dizzy Dean, and researched methods of building 
recognized as a subdiscipline of kinesiology until confidence and increasing motivation. 
the 1960s. Unfortunately, Griffith may be thought of as a 

prophet without disciples because no one con- 

Beginnings of Sport tinued his significant work. Although sporadic 
publications about psychological aspects of sport 

and Exercise Psychology and exercise appeared after Griffith’s time, the sub- 
Around the turn of the 20th century, research- discipline largely lay dormant until a reawakening 
ers began assessing how the presence of others in the 1960s. 

Kinesiology Colleagues 

Lindsey Hamilton 
Lindsey Hamilton is a mental conditioning coach for IMG Acad- 
emy in Bradenton, Florida. After being an athlete in college, she 
acted on her interest in psychology by taking a social psychol- 
ogy research position at Stanford University. Then, following 
a stint with a tech company in the automotive industry, she 
found herself pursuing a master’s degree in sport psychology 
at the University of Utah, where she got hooked on a career 
in applied sport psychology. Now, Hamilton works as a mental 
conditioning coach with soccer and basketball teams at IMG 
as well as with a variety of youth, collegiate, and professional 
athletes. She wakes up every day eager to challenge herself 
and those around her to find the best version of themselves 
by cultivating and practicing mental skills. 



mm 176 Introduction to Kinesiology 

SeKEV: PON ee A significant step for the field of sport psychol- 
ogy in the 1980s was the growth of interest in 

Coleman Griffith began systematic research in sport 
applied sport psychology, or mental training with 

psychology in the 1920s. However, because his early athletes. Mental training is a process in which 
work was not extended, the area was not recognized athletes use strategies and techniques, such as 
as an academic subdiscipline of kinesiology until the visualization and mindfulness, to enhance their 
1960s. mental skills, performance, and well-being. Two 

new applied journals were established, The Sport 
Psychologist (TSP) in 1987 and the Journal of 

1960s Through 1990s Applied Sport Psychology (JASP) in 1989. In addi- 
tion, a new organization dedicated to offering 

The 1960s saw an upsurge of interest in the professional services in sport psychology, the 
social-psychological factors associated with phys- Association of Applied Sport Psychology (AASP), 
ical activity; for example, how did the presence was established in 1986. In 1992, AASP created an 
of an audience or an athlete’s personality affect internationally recognized certification program for 
performance? Three professional sport psychology sport psychology consultants. Also in the 1990s, the 
organizations were established: the International United States Olympic Committee created a registry 
Society of Sport Psychology, the North American of certified professionals eligible to consult with 
Society for the Psychology of Sport and Physical Olympic teams and athletes. 
Activity, and the Canadian Society for Psychomotor 
Learning and Sport Psychology. These professional 
sport psychology organizations provided important Modern Sport and Exercise Psychology 
forums for sharing knowledge about the field. The dawning of the 21st century saw a large 

In the 1970s, systematic research programs increase in qualitative research in sport and exer- 
were established at leading universities; graduate cise psychology, which typically involves in-depth 
study became available; and, in 1979, the Journal interview data, as opposed to quantitative research, 
of Sport Psychology began publication. Much of the which presents findings using numbers or statistics. 
research done during this time involved laboratory Sport and exercise psychology practice expanded 
experiments that tested theories from the parent greatly, as both consulting services and applied 
discipline of psychology. Popular topics were attri- materials (e.g., books, videos, websites) prolifer- 
butions (explanations that affect motivation) for ated. Two new journals were established to serve 
achievement, competitive stress, and self-efficacy practitioners (e.g., coaches, consultants, athletes): 
(a theory related to confidence). Journal of Sport Psychology in Action (2010) and 

In the 1980s, exercise psychology separated Case Studies in Sport and Exercise Psychology 
from sport psychology into a distinct subdisci- (2016). 
pline within kinesiology. Division 47, Exercise and AASP grew to become the preeminent profes- 
Sport Psychology, was created as a professional sional organization for the practice of sport psy- 
division of the American Psychological Associa- chology. In 2017, AASP revised the certification pro- 
tion. The Journal of Sport Psychology became the gram for sport psychology consultants, creating the 
Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology in 1988. Certified Mental Performance Consultant, or CMPC, 
Field research grew sharply in sport and exercise credential that could be attained through specified 
psychology beginning in the 1980s. Much of the university coursework, 400 hours of mentored con- 
earlier research had been conducted in laboratory sulting experience, and successful completion of a 
settings, seemingly to gain academic credibility for certification exam. The CMPC certification received 
the young field. However, researchers now saw accreditation from the National Commission for 
the need to study sport and exercise in the field Certifying Agencies in 2020, establishing sport 
in order to gain a better understanding of psy- psychology as a nationally recognized profession. 
chological processes as they operate in real-world Research in exercise psychology became a focus 
settings. For example, researchers began to study at many large universities because as a public 
aspects of the exercise environment that either health endeavor, it attracted external funding in the 
attracted or discouraged participants, as well as form of grants from agencies such as the National 
how personality characteristics such as body image, Institutes of Health or the National Science Foun- 
social physique anxiety, and physical self-efficacy dation. Some interesting societal issues included 
(confidence) influenced exercise participation. the emerging research that demonstrated enhanced 



Chapter 7 |S port and Exercise Psychology 177 

cognitive performance (e.g., better math and read- Consider the difficulty of accurately measuring 
ing scores) as a result of physical activity interven- people’s thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Assess- 
tions with children. Similarly, physical activity has ing levels of self-esteem is much different from 
been shown to enhance cognitive performance and measuring the amount of oxygen they expend 
help older adults delay memory loss. during a fitness test or how much weight they 

lose in the preseason. For this reason, psycholog- 
ical inventories must meet rigorous standards for 

aN uniformity of procedures in their development, 
The Certified Mental Performance Consultant (CMPC) administration, and scoring so that researchers 

certification program was nationally accredited in can gain a valid and reliable assessment of behav- 

2020 to provide sport psychology consultants with a ior. Therefore, psychological inventories used by 

credible professional credential. researchers do not simply list questions that have 
been thrown together; instead, they are carefully 
constructed and tested assessment tools that have 

Research Methods for Sport met specific standards set by experts in the sub- 
discipline. 

and Exercise Psychology To develop the example inventory provided in 
this section, the Passion Scale, Vallerand and col- 

By now, you understand the nature and historical 
leagues (e.g., 2003, 2007) developed a conceptual 

development of sport and exercise psychology as a 
analysis of passion toward activities, or a strong 

scientific area of study and practice. How is science 
inclination toward an activity that people like or 

conducted in this subdiscipline? What methods do 
even love, that they find important, and in which 

researchers use to ask important questions about 
they invest time and energy. Their analysis resulted 

the psychological aspects of physical activity par- 
in the dualistic model of passion in which passion 

ticipation? Researchers use six methods to system- 
can be either obsessive or harmonious. Multiple 

atically assess thoughts, feelings, and behaviors in 
research studies were conducted to develop the 

sport and exercise psychology. 
Passion Scale based on this conceptual model and 
to provide scientific support (called validity and 
reliability) for the inventory. 

JNO UE = ee 
>» Interviews. Interviews are used in sport and 

Research methods in sport and exercise psychology 
exercise psychology when the research question 

include questionnaires, interviews, observation, 
being pursued requires in-depth understanding 

physiological measures, biochemical measures, and of individuals’ beliefs, experiences, or values. For 
content analysis. example, interviews may be useful if one is trying 

to understand why children drop out of youth 
sport programs because interviews allow children 

>» Questionnaires. Questionnaires are widely to explain things in their own words rather than 
used in sport and exercise psychology. Some ques- merely respond to questionnaires. As with any 
tionnaires take the form of survey instruments other scientific method, however, interviews must 
assessing demographic variables such as age, sex, be structured to be systematic, and researchers 
and socioeconomic status; they may also assess must be trained in their use in order for them to 
general information such as the type, frequency, be effective and valid. You can see examples of 
and duration of exercise engaged in during the qualitative interview questions in the Example 
past week. Most questionnaires, however, take the Interview Guide. 
form of psychological inventories, which are stan- 

>» Observations. A third method used in sport 
dardized measures of specific forms of thoughts, 

and exercise psychology is observation of behavior. 
feelings, or behaviors. For example, psychological 

For example, researchers often observe the behav- 
inventories are used to measure the amount of 

ior of coaches during practice or competition to 
anxiety, motivation, and confidence one has about 

assess the frequency of various types of feedback 
exercising or competing in sport. Questionnaires 

and communication that they provide to athletes. 
can be administered using paper-and-pencil meth- 

Behavioral observation is also used in research that 
ods, but online programs (e.g., Qualtrics) are used 

examines the motivation of children to engage in 
more often to provide easier and quicker access to 

physical activity or vigorous play activities. Typi- 
research participants via the Internet. 



ae 178 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Have You Got Passion for Physical Activity? 

Complete the following questionnaire by marking a response for each item as you think about 

your favorite physical activity. 
Scoring your responses: totally agree = 7, agree = 6, sort of agree = 5, unsure = 4, sort of 

disagree = 3, don't really agree = 2, don’t agree at all = 1. 

Totally Sort of Sort of Don’t really Don’t agree 

agree Agree agree Unsure disagree agree at all 

1. | am completely taken with 
my activity. 

2. My activity reflects the quali- 
ties that | like about myself. 

3. My activity allows me to live 
memorable experiences. 

4. My activity is in harmony with 
other activities in my life. 

5. My activity is a passion that | 
manage to control. 

6. | cannot live without my 
activity. 

7. My mood depends on my 
being able to do my activity. 

8. | have difficulty imagining my 
life without my activity. 

9. | am emotionally dependent 
on my activity. 

10. | have an almost obsessive 
feeling for my activity. 

Total your scores for items 1 through 5 to get your positive passion score. This score represents 
how much you love to engage in your activity based on your own free will to choose to participate. 
A high score indicates that you gain great joy from the activity, that you don’t feel you have to do 
it, and that it doesn’t control your life. Next, total your scores for items 6 through 10 to get your 
obsessive passion score. This score represents how much you feel that you must engage in your 
activity, as if your activity controls you and you have to do it (e.g., for others, for approval, for 
yourself). Are you passionate about your physical activity? How much of that passion is positive, 
and how much is obsessive? You want your positive passion to outweigh your obsessive passion 
so that you feel in control of your life and gain joy from participation—not pressure to perform. 
Consider ways to lessen the obsessive passion you feel and increase your positive passion for 
your physical activity. Remind yourself what you love about the activity, and focus on the joy of 
that movement. Participate on your own terms in pursuit of personal goals that are challenging 
and motivational, yet not obsessively controlling. 
Adapted from Vallerand et al. (2003). 



Chapter 7 |S port and Exercise Psychology 179 

cally, observation studies use video replay, along psychology, but brief mention here will be helpful. 
with some type of behavior checklist or coding This type of assessment involves drawing and ana- 
system, to ensure that observation of the behavior lyzing blood or urine for chemicals from the body 
is occurring within a particular set of parameters. that represent responses to stressors or emotions. 
Two observers are typically used to code behavior, Examples include epinephrine and cortisol, which 
and their results are checked against each other to are released by the adrenal gland in response to 
ensure a consistent, reliable assessment. certain types of stressors. 

» Physiological measures. Physiological mea- >» Content analysis. Researchers use content 
sures of physical, mental, and emotional responses analysis to analyze written material from various 
are sometimes referred to as biofeedback. For exam- sources, such as government documents, news- 
ple, blood pressure and heart rate may be measured papers, magazines, and even video programming. 
to assess the effects of psychological stressors. Exer- For example, a researcher could analyze several 
cise psychology professionals use measures such as popular video shows to assess the levels of phys- 
these to study the effects of exercise on stress reac- ical activity being modeled to viewers. Written or 
tivity and existing anxiety levels. Sport psychology dictated physical activity logs are also useful in 
professionals might measure the amount of tension exercise research because they provide detailed 
in muscles to assess how well athletes can learn to accounting of all or selected types of physical 
relax physically through mental training. Researchers activity performed within a given period. 
can also assess levels of attention or relaxation by Thus, researchers in sport and exercise psychol- 
measuring brain waves. Brain-imaging technologies, ogy have various methods available to them. Often, 
such as fMRI and PET scans, can be used to view researchers use two or more methods in a single 
how the brain responds when athletes visualize research study. For example, a study examining exer- 
performing their skills. For example, expert athletes cise adherence in an adult fitness program could use 
activate areas in their brains much differently than observation to assess participation rates, intensity of 
beginner athletes, and this difference indicates that exercise, and instructor behavior; questionnaires to 
elite sport performance is hardwired in a specific measure participants’ self-confidence and perceived 
way in the brain. benefits in relation to exercising; and physiological 

>» Biochemical measures. Biochemical mea- measures of participants’ resting heart rate and lung 

sures are used less often in sport and exercise volume. All of these methods are designed to be 

Example Interview Guide 
Experiences With and Perceptions of Physical Activity in Sedentary College Females 

1. Tell me about your experiences being physically active throughout your life until now. 

2. Describe the influences in your life that either led you to engage in physical activity or dis- 
couraged you from doing so. 

Possible probes: Parents, siblings, friends, environment, social expectations for females 

3. What are your thoughts and feelings about engaging in physical activity? Have those changed 
across your life? How do you feel now as compared to when you were a child? 

4. \f your feelings about physical activity changed, what do you think influenced these changes? 

5. What messages have you received from society about being physically active, and what do 
you think and feel about those messages? 

6. Describe any types of physical activities that you engage in now. 

7. What types of physical activities are interesting to you, or what types might you wish to 

engage in? 

8. What types of things would make physical activity interesting to you or motivate you to be 

more physically active? 

9. Do you have any other thoughts about your participation in or commitment to being more 

physically active? 



Ma 150 Introduction to Kinesiology 

used in a systematic manner to ensure that accurate successful and unsuccessful athletes (e.g., Krane 

and consistent measures are obtained. This system- et al., 2021). These differences are not based on 

atic approach is the mark of science—and it is very innate, deeply ingrained personality traits but 

different from the casual observations that we all rather involve one’s level of motivation and one’s 

make in everyday social interactions. effectiveness at thinking and responding to sport 

All scientific methods in sport and exercise challenges. Specifically, as compared with less 
psychology have limitations. For instance, ques- successful athletes, athletes who are successful are 

tionnaires typically provide a systematic measure 
e« more self-confident, 

of certain phenomena, but they lack the depth and 
richness of interviews. However, it is harder to estab- * better able to cope well with stress and 

lish a consistent, systematic approach when using distractions, 

interviews than when using questionnaires. Given ¢ better able to control emotions and remain 
this mix of considerations, scientists in sport and appropriately activated (“psyched up,” not 
exercise psychology look at the menu of research “psyched out”), 

methods available and select the ones best suited to * better at attentional focusing and refocusing, 
the research study at hand. This menu also includes 

° better able to view anxiety as beneficial, and 
other choices for researchers, such as whether to 
conduct the study in a laboratory or field setting and * more highly determined and committed to 

what types of participants to use in the research. excellence in their sport. 

Olympic and world-champion athletes have 

Overview of Knowledge defined mental toughness as the natural or devel- 
oped psychological edge that enables them to cope 

in Sport and Exercise Psychology with competitive demands and remain determined, 
focused, confident, and in control under pressure 

This section takes a brief look at a few selected 
(Jones et al., 2007). These athletes identify the 

topics in sport and exercise psychology to give you 
following as critical personality responses that 

a glimpse of the knowledge that researchers and 
represent mental toughness: loving the pressure 

practitioners have produced. The topics include 
of competition, adapting to and coping with dis- 

personality, motivation, arousal and anxiety, social 
tractions and sudden changes, channeling anxiety, 

and group processes, and mental skills training in 
being unfazed by mistakes in the process, being 

physical activity. 
acutely aware of any inappropriate thoughts and 
feelings and changing them immediately to per- 

Personality form optimally when needed, using failure to drive 
One of the most popular issues in sport and exer- oneself, learning from failure, and knowing how 

cise psychology involves the relationship between to rationally handle success—an impressive list of 
personality and physical activity participation. We qualities that we all would like to have as part of 
typically think of personality as the unique blend a mentally tough personality! 
of characteristics that makes a person both differ- 
ent from and similar to others. Our personalities 
determine our thoughts, feelings, and behaviors —eKEY POINeT e 
(i.e., the ABCs) in response to our environment. No uniform set of traits exists for an athletic personality, 

but successful athletes have stronger commitment and 
Personality and Sport 

are better able to cope with stress, distractions, and 
Despite the opinions of many, no distinguishable difficulties, and they do so with more confidence than 
athletic personality has been shown to exist. That is, do less successful athletes. 
no consistent research findings show that athletes 
have a general personality type distinct from the 
personalities of nonathletes. Also, no research has Although most sport personality research has 
shown consistent personality differences between focused on the influence of personality on sport 
athletic subgroups (e.g., team athletes versus indi- behavior, research has also examined the con- 
vidual-sport athletes, contact-sport athletes versus verse—that is, the effect of sport participation on 
noncontact-sport athletes). personality development and change. In the United 

Research has, however, identified several dif- States, it is commonly believed that organized sport 
ferences in personality characteristics between builds character and that sport participation may 



Chapter 7| Sport and Exercise Psychology 131 

help one to develop socially valued personality example, a program called The First Tee has been 
attributes. Research shows, however, that compe- successful in developing life skills in youth through 
tition reduces prosocial behaviors such as helping the game of golf (Weiss et al., 2016). The program 
and sharing and that this effect is magnified by trains instructors to use specific teaching strategies 
losing. Sport participation has also been shown to that are mastery driven, personally empowering 
increase rivalrous, antisocial behavior and aggres- for students, and focused on lifelong learning. 
sion and has been linked to lower levels of moral The moral of the story is this: Sport doesn’t build 
reasoning (Vealey & Chase, 2016). character—people do! 

Nevertheless, the character-related effects of 
sport do have a positive side. Research in a variety Personality and Exercise 
of field settings has demonstrated that children’s As in sport, researchers have found no particular 
moral development and prosocial behaviors (e.g¢., exercise personality or set of personality charac- 
cooperation, acceptance, sharing) can be enhanced teristics to predict exercise adherence; in other 
in sport settings when adult leaders structure situ- words, exercisers cannot be differentiated from 
ations to foster these positive behaviors (Hellison, nonexercisers based on an overall personality 
2010; Holt, 2016). Interventions with children type. Researchers have, however, found three per- 
have succeeded in building character when nat- sonality characteristics that are strong predictors 
urally occurring conflicts arise and are discussed of exercise behavior. First, those who are more 
with children in order to enhance their reasoning confident in their physical abilities tend to exercise 
and values related to both sport and life events. more than those who are less physically confident. 
Indeed, we have seen a proliferation of positive A second important predictor is self-motivation; 
youth development programs that use sport and specifically, as you might expect, self-motivated 
physical activity to build important psychosocial people are more likely to begin and continue exer- 
characteristics in children (e.g., emotional regula- cise programs, whereas less motivated people are 
tion, self-worth, interpersonal competence). For more likely to drop out or never start at all. Third, 

Professional Issues in Kinesiology 

Expertise: Early Specialization in Youth Sport 
The past two decades have seen a trend of pushing children to choose one sport and train in it 
year-round in order to pursue elite status (termed specialization). To many, this seems to be a 
logical path because the young athlete receives more time to develop specific skills in the chosen 
sport. However, research indicates that early, exclusive specialization is not needed in most sports 
for most kids. More specifically, besides gymnastics, figure skating, and diving, most sports are 
designated as late specialization, which means that kids don’t need to specialize in them until 
age 14 to 16 (Balyi et al., 2013). 

For example, a study of more than 700 professional baseball players found that their average 
age of specializing in baseball was 15, and 52 percent did not specialize until age 17 (Ginsburg 
et al., 2014). They did start playing baseball early (at an average age of 6 years), and this type 
of early engagement is important for priming the brain for eye-hand coordination, ball tracking, 
throwing, and striking. However, early engagement is not early specialization, and these athletes 
did not abandon other sports and activities just to play baseball. Moreover, early diversification 
(engaging in multiple sports and activities) helps kids develop better overall motor skills even if 
they later choose to specialize, whereas early specialization has been linked to burnout, dropping 
out, and injuries (Vealey & Chase, 2016). 

Citation style: APA 
Balyi, |., Way, R., & Higgs, C. (2013). Long-term athlete development. Human Kinetics. 

Ginsburg, R.D., Smith, S.R., Danforth, N., Ceranoglu, T.A., Durant, S.A., Kamin, H.,.. . Masek, B. (2014). 

Patterns of specialization in professional baseball players. Journal of Clinical Sport Psychology, 8(3), 261- 

275. https://doi.org/10.1123/jcsp.2014-0032 



a 182 Introduction to Kinesiology 

researchers have identified an activity trait—that is, related to physical activity through indications that 
a tendency to be busy and energetic and to prefer cognitive functions respond positively to increased 
fast-paced living—that is linked to people’s choices levels of physical activity. 
to engage in exercise (Rhodes & Pfaelli, 2012). Many people also associate exercise with posi- 

Echoing the idea that sport builds character, tive changes in mood and anxiety. Most people say 
exercise or fitness training has also been popu- that they “feel better” or “feel good” after vigorous 
larly associated with positive personality changes exercise, a fact that emphasizes the important 
and mental health (Ciccolo et al., 2019; Mandolesi link between physical activity and psychological 
et al., 2018). The personality characteristic that well-being. In addition, research documents that 
researchers have examined most often in this anxiety and tension decline after acute physical 
area is self-esteem—our perception of personal activity. Much research has been conducted to 
worthiness and the emotions associated with that determine whether exercise or fitness reduces 
perception. In short, we can think of self-esteem people’s susceptibility to stress, and the gener- 
as how much we like ourselves. Research has ally accepted conclusion is that aerobically fit 
generally confirmed that fitness training improves people demonstrate a reduced psychosocial stress 
self-esteem in children, adolescents, and adults and response. One tentative explanation for this finding 
that exercise positively influences perceptions of posits that exercise either acts as a coping strategy 
physical capabilities, or self-confidence. Exercise that reduces the physiological response to stress 
training also improves body image, or how we per- or serves as a sort of inoculator to foster a more 
ceive and feel about our own bodies. In addition, effective response to psychosocial stress. 
many aspects of intellectual performance have been 

Carefully designed organized sport and individual fitness training can build character and lead to positive personality changes. 
© Human Kinetics 



Chapter 7| Sport and Exercise Psychology 

ANA GU beg constitute our major reasons for making physical 

Sport has not been found to build socially valued activity part of our lives. The number one reason 

attributes, or character, but exercise h that children begin taking part in a competitive 
as been shown to 

produce sever sport is to have fun, and research with elite athletes 
al benefits, including enhanced self-con- 

indicates that they engaged in enjoyable play expe- 
cept and psychological well-being and decreased 

riences as children more than they did in grueling 
anxiety and depression. physical training (Vealey & Chase, 2016). 

The fuel of enjoyment becomes even more 

Prolonged physical activity is also associated motivational when it turns into flow—an optimal 

with decreases in depression and a reduction of mental state characterized by total absorption in 

depressive symptoms in people who are clinically a task (Csikszentmihalyi, 2008). Exercisers may 

depressed at the outset of exercise treatment. speak, for example, of a “runner’s high,” which 

Explanations for these changes range from the dis- is an elusive state in which physical activity feels 

traction hypothesis, which maintains that exercise effortless and immensely enjoyable. Athletes may 
train to achieve the ultimate high of “being in the 

distracts attention from stress, to other explanations 

focused on physiological and biochemical changes zone” and enjoying the ultimate thrill of sport 

in the body after exercise. characterized by peak performance. Flow occurs 
when people experience a balance between their 
skills and the challenge that they perceive in the 

Motivation situation. Thus, as kinesiology professionals, we 
Sport and exercise psychology professionals also must take care to match the challenge to people’s 
seek to understand what motivates people to skills when designing exercise programs, sport 
engage in physical activity. Motivation involves training programs, and youth sport competitions. 
a complex set of internal and external forces that 
influence us to behave in certain ways. The behav- Competence 
iors most typically associated with motivation are Motivation is also fueled by competence. The innate 
choice, effort, and persistence. That is, we assume (inborn) human quest for competence begins in 
that people are motivated when they choose to infancy and continues throughout our lives. Our 
join a fitness program, work intensely during the need for competence motivates us to try new skills 
program, and continue to adhere to the training and activities. When we succeed in such attempts, 
program when their lives become busy. Thus, moti- we feel worthy and proud, which fuels our contin- 
vation directs and energizes our behavior in sport ued mastery attempts in those activities. 
and exercise. Unfortunately, motivation cannot Thus, one important strategy for motivating 
be directly given to someone. Rather, in order to people to engage in physical activity is to help 
enhance motivation, we need to understand and tap them develop competence in their movements. For 
into four important motivational fuels: enjoyment, example, athletes who play ice hockey probably 
competence, autonomy, and relatedness. had effective instructors or coaches who taught 

them how to skate and handle a puck. Adults who 
Enjoyment begin exercise programs also need progressive 

Do you spend a lot of time doing things that you instruction so that they feel competent in their 

don’t enjoy? One hopes that your answer is no! physical activity training. Research shows that moti- 

Obviously, athletes and exercisers gain motivation vation is enhanced more when we define success 

when they enjoy what they are doing, be it kayak- and competence in personal and controllable ways 

ing on a beautiful lake or competing in a rousing than when we define them in relation to others. 

pickup game of basketball. Such activities provide We can enhance motivation by helping athletes and 

us with the positive subjective experiences that exercisers to set personal performance goals based 

. Revisit Your Flow Experience 

Think about a time when you experienced flow. Describe the activity that you were doing and what 

the experience felt like. What made it different from other experiences? How long did it last, and 

why do you think it went away when it did? 



mg 184 Introduction to Kinesiology 

on individual improvement rather than comparing achieve outcomes or rewards beyond the activity 

their progress with that of others. itself, such as trophies, scholarships, approval from 

Another motivational strategy is to praise young others, or enhanced muscle tone and body image. 

athletes not for performance outcomes but for Extrinsic motivation isn’t always driven exter- 

effort and strategies. Although they should be rec- nally by the demands of others. Sometimes it is 

ognized for their accomplishments, excessive praise autonomous, as when people choose to go on 

of outcomes (e.g., winning a heat in swimming) training runs or swim laps during a vacation. They 

often leads to pressure and less motivation to work do these activities to gain some reward outside of 
hard (Dweck, 2006). It’s best to comment instead on the activity, but they make the personal choice to 

their controllable effort and the persistent practice do it, and they own the behavior. It is important 
that enabled them to achieve the positive outcome for us to develop autonomous extrinsic motivation 
(e.g., “Your hard work on your flip turns really paid because activities are rarely driven only by intrinsic 
off in that race—congratulations!”). motivation. For example, athletes need self-deter- 

The need for competence, and its importance as mined extrinsic motivation (along with intrinsic 
a fuel for motivation, can sometimes lead to incom- motivation) to commit to intensive training and to 
petence avoidance. Athletes who focus on avoiding invest the required time in practice. 
incompetence often experience fear of failure, One useful way to think about motivation is to 
which is really a fear of shame and embarrass- situate its different forms across a continuum of 
ment related to not being good enough. Another self-determination (see figure 7.1). Intrinsic motiva- 
motivational orientation related to incompetence tion anchors the high end of the self-determination 
avoidance is perfectionism, in which a person tends continuum. Autonomous extrinsic motivation is also 
to strive for and focus on flawless performance. high in self-determination, because athletes internal- 
Some aspects of perfectionism are helpful, such as ize the extrinsic reasons for playing as valuable and as 
having high standards and strong organizational part of their identity. Controlled extrinsic motivation 
skills. However, maladaptive perfectionists are is the least self-determined form of motivation and 
overly concerned with and unable to accept mis- occurs when athletes need to follow the demands of 
takes, which leads them to experience excessive others or obtain external rewards. Of course, amoti- 
anxiety, reduced confidence, and burnout. vation is simply the lack of any type of motivation. 

Different types of motivation often operate 
Autonomy at the same time and work together to enhance 
Another basic motivational fuel is autonomy, behavior. For example, a person might love to 
also called self-determination, which consists of bicycle Gntrinsic motivation) because she values 
the feeling that one has control over oneself and the strength and fitness that it provides (autono- 
one’s actions. Think about how your motivation mous extrinsic motivation); she might also begin a 
might wane when you have to sit through a boring challenging new training program with a coach in 
required training class, as opposed to when you order to qualify for an upcoming race (controlled 
have a free afternoon to write up your own per- extrinsic motivation). There are times when we 
sonalized training program. However, don’t we need controlled motivation, but it works best when 
sometimes need external motivators beyond what it is accompanied by intrinsic and autonomous 
is inside of us? The answer, of course, is yes. extrinsic motivation. Self-determined forms of moti- 

Motivation can be defined as either intrinsic or vation have been linked to greater attendance and 
extrinsic. Intrinsic motivation involves doing an participation in physical activity, lower intentions 
activity for the pleasure and satisfaction derived to drop out of sport, and lower levels of burnout. 
from engaging in that activity. For instance, kids 
play soccer and ice-skate and swim because they Relatedness 
enjoy the feelings they experience when doing The final fuel source for motivation is relatedness, 
these activities. The reward is the activity itself. or our need to be connected to those around us 
However, not all aspects of sport or exercise par- and to experience a sense of belonging. In this 
ticipation are intrinsically interesting to people. regard, people who exercise as part of a group 
Often, in fact, extrinsic motivation is needed in are more likely to be adherent than are those who 
order to fuel the repetitive practice required to exercise alone (Lox et al., 2019). For instance, pos- 
build skill or the physical fitness training required itive connections with friends and teammates lead 
for developing stamina and strength. Extrinsic to greater commitment and motivation in youth 
motivation involves doing an activity in order to sport. Therefore, instead of just assuming that social 



Chapter 7| Sport and Exercise Psychology 185 

connections are automatically made in exercise performing “in the zone?” These two scenarios— 
groups and sport teams, coaches and exercise gut-wrenching anxiety and the exhilaration of peak 
leaders should thoughtfully and intentionally plan performance—illustrate two ways in which we 
activities and strategies to provide the important experience arousal in physical activity. 
motivational fuel of relatedness for all participants. Arousal is a state of bodily energy or physical 

and mental readiness. It results from the ways in 

Arousal and Anxiety which athletes’ minds and bodies respond to com- 
petition, or the ways in which people involved in 

To review, motivation involves intensity of behavior 
exercise respond to physical activity. Arousal falls 

and the urge to experience enjoyment, competence, 
along a continuum ranging from very low (as in 

autonomy, and relatedness. However, the urge to 
deep sleep) to extremely high (the most “wired” 

be competent sometimes creates anxiety for people 
you've ever been). We can think of arousal simply 

as they participate in sport or exercise. Has your 
as the experience of generic energy. When arousal 

performance ever been disrupted because you were 
becomes too high and people interpret it negatively 

tense or nervous? In contrast, can you remember 
(e.g., “I feel scared,” “I feel nervous”), it is labeled 

Why do you participate in sport? 

Amotivation Controlled Autonomous Intrinsic 
extrinsic motivation extrinsic motivation motivation 

I’m not sure why. My parents want I'm an athlete. It’s fun. 
me to play. 

| wonder what |value what | | love it. 
the point is. | need an athletic learni n sport. 

scholarship. | enjoy it. 
I’m questioning  Itteaches me. 
why I’m doing it. | feel pressure from self-discipline. 

other people to play. 
What | get from sport. 

| would feel like a is importantt o me. — 
failure if | quit. 

, 

|L ow self-determination High self-determination | 

s(cul awa The continuum of motivation. 

Reprinted by permission from R.S. Vealey and M.A. Chase, Best Practice for Youth Sport (Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics, 2016), 129. 

What Fuels Your Motivation? 

What is your favorite physical activity? Why do you do it? What fuels your motivation to particl- 

pate in this activity? Consider how much your participation is fueled by enjoyment, competition 

or stimulation, desire to demonstrate your competence and feel good about that, desire to feel 

autonomous or in control of yourself, or desire to be part of a group and be accepted by others. 

What is most important to you? Consider how you might increase your motivation and commitment 

to your activity by creating the right fuel mixture for yourself every day. 



Ms 186 Introduction to Kinesiology 

as anxiety. In contrast, high levels of arousal that because the stress motivated you to prepare or 

are labeled positively (e.g., “I feel ecstatic!”) are train to succeed in that situation. Stress becomes 

often described as joy or happiness. a problem only when we do not allow adequate 
recovery time from life or competitive demands. 

Reframing Anxiety Chronic stress without adequate recovery burns out 
Into Readiness and Excitement the energy reserves of athletes and others engaged 

Research shows that highly successful elite athletes in physical activity. 

do not have less anxiety than less successful ath- 
How Arousal Influences Performance 

letes, but they do perceive their feelings of nervous- 
ness and anxiety as helpful (Hanton et al., 2008). Many sophisticated models are available to explain 

That is, they know that these feelings represent the how arousal and anxiety influence performance in 

increasing readiness of their bodies to perform, so sport. One general rule holds that people perform 

they accept the nervousness and anxiety as normal better at moderate levels of arousal. This principle 

and helpful (this is called reframing). Try this is referred to as the inverted-U model of arousal, 

yourself! The next time you feel nervous, instead in which athletes’ performance increases as their 

of labeling it as negative and focusing on how arousal levels increase up to an optimal or mod- 

bad it feels, tell yourself that your body is ready, erate point, after which athletes go “over the top,” 

you're excited, and this added energy will help you and performance decreases as their arousal levels 

succeed. It works! Professional golf legend Tiger become too high. As shown in figure 7.2, there is 

Woods explained his response to anxiety: an optimal zone of arousal for performance—not 

“Am I ever nervous? Are you kidding me? I’m too low and not too high. 

nervous on the very first shot. I’m nervous through- The optimal intensity of arousal is unique 

out the entire day. But it’s how I channel it, how I for each person. Preferred arousal levels can be 

harness it. How do I put that energy into deeper affected by individual factors such as personality 

focus or deeper intensity? That’s something we all characteristics, coping ability, and skill level. In 

can do. It’s not being afraid of it or ashamed of it. addition, an athlete’s optimal intensity of arousal 

Go after it” (Morrice, 2019, p. 58). differs according to the situational demands of 
different activities. For instance, a weightlifter can 

Stress be at a very high arousal level and perform well, 

People often assume that anxiety is the same thing whereas a golfer’s optimal level for performance is 

as stress, but stress serves the important purpose somewhat lower. Arousal influences performance 

of stimulating growth. Stress may be defined through its effect on muscular tension and the 

simply as a demand placed on a person. In this 
formulation, we stress athletes all the time through 
weight training and exhaustive physical repetitions 
of their sport skills. In fact, careful progression of 
physical and mental stress builds athletes’ stress 
tolerance so that they can withstand the stress 
of competitive performance. Thus, stress is not 
the same thing as anxiety, though it often creates 
anxiety. The type of anxiety studied most widely in 
sport psychology is based on the threat of failure 
or evaluation, as when athletes compete in public. 
Research has demonstrated that exercise behavior 
can be influenced by social physique anxiety, or Performance 

apprehension about one’s body and appearance. 
For instance, when people feel less apprehensive 
about their appearance, they are more likely to 
participate in activities that require them to reveal 
more of their bodies (e.g., gymnastics, swimming). 

Overall, stress may induce high levels of arousal Low Moderate High 

and even anxiety, but it often exerts a positive influ- Arousal 
ence on performance. Think back to times when 
you performed well in either sport or academics acuayer4 =I nverted-U model of arousal. 



Chapter 7|Sport and Exercise Psychology 187 

performer’s ability to properly focus attention. presence of others but by performers’ perceptions 
The muscles of athletes performing in sport often that others are evaluating them. We know from 
become tense and lose their capacity to make the the previous section of this chapter that everyone 
smooth, coordinated movements needed to per- has a certain optimal arousal zone; therefore, the 
form optimally. In this situation, the athlete’s atten- presence of others can influence performance dif- 
tion may turn inward toward worry and thoughts ferently based on individual responses to changes 
of inadequacy or narrow to the point where the in arousal, People should avoid situations of exces- 
athlete misses important competitive cues that are sive evaluation or analysis when learning sport 
crucial to optimal performance. skills; the pressure of such situations can hinder the 

Sport psychology experts help athletes learn to learning process by adversely affecting beginners’ 
find their optimal arousal zones and then develop arousal levels and quality of attention. 
focus plans in which they engage in individualized The presence of others applies a bit differently 
thoughts and activities (e.g., psyching up or calm- to exercise because the people present are usually 
ing down) to create the levels of arousal that work socially supportive workout partners or simply 
best for them. It takes some experimentation, but others exercising on their own (e.g., others work- 
athletes can learn how to find their optimal arousal ing out at a public facility). Family social support 
levels, how to monitor themselves, and how to is a strong predictor of exercise maintenance, 
adjust their arousal when needed. and those who exercise with their spouses have 

higher rates of exercise adherence than do those 

Social or Group Processes who exercise alone (Lox et al., 2019). Research 
has also demonstrated that the physical activity 

Social or group processes can influence individuals’ levels of children are related to the modeling of 
behaviors in various ways. This section addresses such activity, as well as shared activities, social 
the effects of the presence of others and of group support, and encouragement within families. 
membership. Several studies have demonstrated that active 

children perceive more parental encouragement 
Presence of Others 

than do inactive children. At the other end of the 
How does your behavior when you are alone age spectrum, the social isolation of many elderly 
differ from your behavior when you are with other people is problematic because social incentives 
people? Why do some people prefer to exercise at to engage in physical activity decrease with age. 
home but others like to exercise with others in a Community-based programs can help provide the 
public gym? Why do some athletes perform better needed social support for habitual physical activity 
in front of a big crowd? Does home advantage participation at all ages. 
really exist? Since the turn of the 20th century, 
researchers have been fascinated with such ques- 
tions—that is, with the effects of an audience on KcEYeS? eONeeeeeceeeere eeee  
human performance. Family support and modeling are highly predictive of 

Generally, the presence of other people increases 
the physical activity participation of children, whereas 

our arousal, which in turn may either hurt or help 
elderly people tend to become less physically active 

our performance. Generally, spectators have a neg- 
because of social isolation. 

ative effect on someone who is learning a skill but 
a positive effect on someone who is very skilled. 
Think about a new golfer who is still learning the 
game and must tee off in front of a large group on Group Membership 
the first hole. The presence of spectators increases The area of group dynamics focuses both on how 
her arousal, and because her skills are not well being part of a group influences behavior and, 
learned, this arousal causes her to hit a bad shot. conversely, on how certain psychosocial factors 
In contrast, consider a professional tennis player influence collective group behavior. Are people 
who makes the finals at Wimbledon for the first more likely to adhere to exercise programs if they 
time. The huge crowd at Centre Court is likely to participate in groups rather than exercise individ- 
inspire and elevate her performance. ually? Why do some teams have better chemistry 

Although this explanation may sound simple, than others? And why do teams with better chem- 
the ways in which others affect our behavior are in istry often perform better than more talented teams 
fact complex. This effect is caused not by the mere with poorer social and psychological cohesiveness? 



Ml 188 Introduction to Kinesiology 

A group performs better, and its members feel We also know that cohesion is bred by success. 

more satisfied, when the group is cohesive. Cohe- Thus, early successes are crucial in the develop- 

sion consists of the tendency for groups to stick ment of group dynamics; indeed, when groups 

together and remain united in pursuing goals (Eys experience early success, cohesion develops 

et al., 2021). Thus, coaches and exercise leaders accordingly. Even so, cohesion is a dynamic quality 

should strive to develop and nurture cohesion in that is always changing within a group; for exam- 
their teams or groups, and they can do so in several ple, conflicts that require resolution may arise, but 
ways. First, cohesion can be facilitated by empha- the group may still be cohesive. On the other hand, 
sizing uniqueness or a positive identity related to the quest for cohesion can go too far, resulting in 
group membership. For example, group identifi- extreme cohesion that involves conformity and 
cation and cohesion can be nourished through elitism. Although a group needs a strong, positive 
the use of nicknames such as the “Sweat Net” or shared identity, it should also celebrate and respect 
the “Lunch Bunch.” Athletes may also demonstrate diversity among its members. 
solidarity and commitment to the group through Group dynamics research also examines how 
actions such as wearing team gear. Cohesion also group membership influences individual perfor- 
increases when individual members of teams mance. For instance, the term social loafing refers 
understand and accept their roles within the group. to a decrease in individual performance within 
Most people prefer to exercise with another person groups (Heuze & Brunel, 2003). This decline occurs 
or in a group—an arrangement that enhances because individuals believe that their performance 
enjoyment through affiliation and social support is not identifiable and that other group members 
and strengthens commitment to the program. In will pick up the slack. Social loafing is not a 
fact, cohesion and friendship within a group is one conscious process—people do not decide to loaf; 
of the strongest predictors of exercise adherence. rather, it is a psychological tendency when people 

Professional Issues in Kinesiology 

Expertise: Training the Quiet Eye 
Everyone knows that you need to focus your visual attention on the target when performing a 
closed, accuracy skill such as a golf putt or basketball free throw. Research has shown, however, 
that some people are much more skilled than others at doing so and that many performers are 
unaware that they are not focusing optimally. This optimal visual focus is called the quiet eye, 
which means that performers lock onto the relevant stimulus (e.g., golf ball, front of basketball 
rim) prior to execution and hold this gaze for several hundred milliseconds before, during, and 
after the movement (Vickers, 2016). Expert athletes exhibit a longer quiet-eye period than less 
skilled athletes. The good news is that quiet eye can be trained! 

Training one’s quiet eye involves using visual tracking equipment, which was once used only 
for research purposes. In this training, the performer wears a computer-connected helmet with 
cameras focused on his or her eyes and on the visual field. This arrangement allows the athlete 
to perform repetitions of the task and then review his or her eye movements by watching the 
computer recording. Most performers are amazed to find that their eyes moved off the target in 
random ways, and of course these random visual miscues affected the motor programs provided 
to their brains to guide performance. Quiet-eye training has been shown to improve performance in 
basketball, volleyball, golf, sharpshooting, and surgery. It has also improved throwing and catching 
in children with developmental coordination disorder (Lebeau et al., 2016). 

Citation style: APA 
Lebeau, J., Liu, S., Saenz-Moncaleano, C., Sanduvete-Chaves, S., Chacon-Moscoso, S., Becker, Baines 
Tenenbaum, G. (2016). Quiet eye and performance in sport: A meta-analysis. Journal of Sport and Exercise 
Psychology, 38(5), 441-457. https://doi.org/10.1123/jsep.2015-0123 

Vickers, J.N. (2016). Origins and current issues in quiet eye research. Current Issues in Sport Science 1. 
https://www.momentum-quarterly.org/ojs2/index.php/ciss/article/view/36. 



Chapter 7|Sport and Exercise Psychology 189 

perform in a group. Fortunately, it is easily reduced POE DOIN est eee a 7 a 
if we increase the identifiability of individuals by 

Intervention techniques in sport and exercise psychol- 
monitoring their performances. Common ways 
of doing so in sport include using video analysis ogy can increase exercise adherence, enhance sport 

to assess individual performance and compiling performance, develop life skills, aid in injury rehabil- 

individual statistics that break out a single ath- itation, and ease career transitions and retirement 

lete’s performance from the total performance of from sport. 

the team. Social loafing can also be monitored in 
exercise groups if performance totals (e.g., number 
of sit-ups performed, amount of weight lifted, dis- Imagery 

tance run) are recorded so that progress can be The mental programming technique of imagery 
checked. Identifying and monitoring individual uses one’s senses to create or re-create an experi- 

efforts eliminate social loafing. ence in the mind (Vealey & Forlenza, 2021). Seeing 
is believing, as many athletes will tell you. Emily 
Cook, Olympic freestyle skier, stated, “I don’t think 

AAG ES ee I could possibly do a jump, or especially a new 

Cohesion and group membership facilitate physical trick, without using this imagery process. For me, 

activity performance, but social loafing may occur this is the key to the athlete I have become” (Clarey, 
2014). Olympic diver Troy Dumais explained, “The 

unless individuals are monitored and their inputs are 
imagery work is what makes it happen. If you can 

viewed as important to overall performance. 
see yourself hitting a dive, the chances of you hit- 
ting a dive increase greatly” (Maese, 2016). 

Images guide our beliefs, and beliefs guide our 
Mental Skills Training in Physical Activity performances. Indeed, much of our behavior is 

based on deep beliefs about ourselves that some- 
Mental skills training uses intervention techniques 

times are not even accurate. To understand the 
such as goal setting, relaxation training, imagery, 

power of imagery and self-belief, complete the 
and self-talk in conjunction with physical train- 

activity titled Believe and Achieve in the online 
ing to enhance important mental skills such as 

HKPropel Access. 
confidence, focus, and arousal management. The 

Extensive research has shown that when imag- 
importance of mental skills has been documented 

ery is used systematically, it enhances sport and 
by research. For example, a study of professional 

exercise performance. Many elite athletes use 
baseball pitchers found that their coping skills, 

imagery in conjunction with their regular physical 
confidence, and motivation were more important 

training, and they often cite imagery as an import- 
than their physical skills in predicting their success 

ant mental factor in their success. In addition, 
in baseball (Smith et al., 1995). In addition, these 

novice athletes can use imagery to create positive 
mental skills were predictive of all players’ career 

patterns for successful performance, and exercisers 
survival in professional baseball 2 and 3 years later 

can use imagery to visualize their muscles firing 
(Smith & Christensen, 1995). 

and becoming stronger when training for fitness. 
Mental skills training has been used to increase 

Exercisers can also use imagery to dissociate, or 
exercise adherence, improve sport performance, 

direct attention away, from repetitive exercise activ- 
develop important life skills (among young people 

ity by visualizing motivational or pleasant things. 
participating in physical activity), aid in rehabilita- 

For instance, many people listen to music to help 
tion from injury and disease, and enhance career 

them create pleasant mental images while running. 
transition and retirement from sport. For example, 

But how does imagery work? How in the world 
the intervention checklist shown in the sidebar 

could imagining an experience improve your per- 
titled Helping People Get Started With Exercise 

formance? Incredibly, when you vividly imagine 
demonstrates how to set goals and monitor 

performing a well-learned skill (e.g., throwing a 
behavior in order to enhance one’s commitment 

ball), your brain fires in ways that are very similar 
to physical activity. The rest of this section of the 

to what it does when you actually perform the 
chapter gives you an idea of how mental skills 

skills. Thus, imagery works by providing a mental 
training works. Specifically, we focus on the mental 

blueprint for perfect responses; that is, a blueprint 
training tool of imagery, the important mental 

in your brain contains the physical and mental 
skill of attentional focus, and the emerging mental 

responses that represent perfect performance. 
approach of mindfulness. 



Mg 190 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Helping People Get Started With Exercise 

Everyone knows that exercise is good for them, yet it is often difficult to overcome inertia and get 

started with an exercise routine. Here are some tips to help people get started: 

> Avoid the “all-out or nothing” or “no pain, no gain” mentality. Advocate adding light activity 
(e.g., walking) that can enhance physical and mental health. 

» Counsel people to choose activities that they enjoy or that give them a welcome mental 
health break (it shouldn’t feel grueling or excessive). : 

>» Start small, with easy exercise goals, to build confidence and momentum. 

» Use the shaping technique by celebrating small achievements along the path to reaching a 
goal (i.e., use progressive, graduated exercise goals). 

» Encourage people to schedule physical activity as an essential part of each day and to put 
it in their planners as an important appointment with themselves. 

>» Use immediate, informational feedback; provide encouragement; and help people to regulate 
their confidence by practicing productive self-talk such as “I can do this,” “it’s a process,” 
and “one step at a time.” 

» Encourage people to focus not on outcomes such as weight loss but on process goals such 
as moving every day. The physical payoff will come in time; for now, focus on moving daily 
and feeling better. 

These responses are modified and refined both imagine the environment and what you see; imag- 
when you physically practice them and when you ery is more productive when you imagine how you 
engage in imagery. Therefore, imagery or mental will respond to your environment. For instance, 
practice works because it trains your brain in a don’t just see the track, the spectators, and your 
way that resembles physically practicing the skill. performance. Instead, imagine running smoothly 
This effect has been demonstrated with many and easily in perfect rhythm, feeling loose, fluid, 
sport skills. strong, and fit. Use the energy of the crowd to 

A great deal of research has been conducted in increase your intensity. See the difference? Imag- 
sport and exercise psychology to help us under- ine the responses that make your performance 
stand the most effective ways to practice imagery successful. 
in order to achieve the greatest effects. Here are >» You don’t have to be lying down to use 
some tips about how to use imagery. imagery. It is helpful and more influential on 

» Use as many senses as possible: visual, performance to practice imagery while in your 
auditory, tactile, olfactory, kinesthetic. In particular, specific performance posture and, if applicable, 
the kinesthetic sense of feeling your body move in while holding an implement that you use in your 
skilled physical activities is important for optimiz- activity (e.g., hockey stick, golf club). Skaters, for 
ing your imagery. instance, should stand and move somewhat as they 

» Practice imagery using both internal and listen to their music and imagine performing their 

external perspectives. Internal perspective involves routines perfectly. 

seeing the image through your own eyes, whereas » Use simple verbal triggers to prime the 
external perspective involves watching from image that you want. For instance, thinking “dollar 
outside of your body, as if watching a video or bill” in a sand bunker provides a golfer with the 
watching yourself performing. Both perspectives image of slicing her wedge through the sand 
can be used to enhance performance, but more behind and under the ball to splash the sand (and 
recent work shows that an internal perspective is the ball) onto the green. Sprinters may think of 
needed in order to truly mimic the brain activity their legs in the blocks as coiled springs ready to 
of actually performing the skill. explode at the starting gun. 

>» Load your images with productive behay- >» Practice imagery daily. Elite athletes create 
ioral, physical, and mental responses. Don’t just and follow systematic mental training plans that 



Chapter 7 |S port and Exercise Psychology 

include imagery practice. Don’t be discouraged if tractions hinder their performances, the problem 
your imagery skills are not as sharp as you'd like. actually resides in how they choose to focus when 
Elite athletes will tell you that it takes time and distractions and obstacles arise. The elite golfer 
practice to perfect your imagery skills (just as it quoted in the preceding paragraph trained himself 
takes time and practice to perfect your physical to choose to focus productively on the process of 
skills). playing—not dwelling on the past or focusing on 

the future but thinking about one shot at a time. 
Attentional Focus Attentional focus is affected by one’s arousal 
Maintaining attentional control and focus may levels. Moderate arousal levels are better for sport 
be the most important mental skill for any type performance than underarousal or overarousal. 
of physical activity. Here’s how one elite golfer One explanation for the inverted-U model shown in 
described the focus that he developed by training figure 7.2 relates to attention. Easterbrook’s (1959) 
with a sport psychology consultant: “I was think- famous model of attention and arousal (the “cue uti- 
ing about exactly what I needed to do, staying in lization” model) is shown in figure 7.3. The model 
the present, thinking about what I was doing now shows that attention varies from very wide to very 
and not about negative past experiences or the narrow depending on one’s level of arousal. The 
outcome” (Neil et al., 2013, p. 123). attentional funnel in the middle shows that atten- 

In sport, performance depends on the cues tion is too broad at low levels of arousal; as a result, 
that athletes process from themselves and from irrelevant cues may be accepted that interfere with 
the social and physical environments. In exercise, focused performance. Attention is predicted to be 
we can enhance our experience and our perfor- optimal at moderate levels of arousal because once 
mance by learning how and when to focus on the arousal becomes very high, attention becomes 
body (association) and how and when to distract very narrow, in which case athletes fail to process 
ourselves (dissociation), perhaps with music or important peripheral cues. Think, for example, of 
visual imagery. Attention, or focus, is trainable a quarierback who is so nervous that his narrow 
and crucial. Although athletes often think that dis- focus of attention interferes with his ability to read 

Subdisciplinary Highlight 
Pre-Performance Routines 

A useful strategy for athletes to use just before performing is the pre-performance routine (PPR). 
This is a preplanned, systematic sequence of thoughts and behaviors that athletes use to focus 
their attention on the task and away from distractions. The PPR also acts as a priming mechanism 
to get athletes’ brains and muscles primed to execute the perfect motor performance. This is 
why many PPRs involve a physical practice swing, stroke, or move, or mental rehearsal (imagery) 
of the skill. 

Importantly, PPRs involve not just physical routines, but preplanned mental routines. A Chinese 
Olympic gold medalist diver explained how he went through his specific behavioral habits and how 
he visualized moves of the dive, adjusted his breathing, and used productive self-talk as part of his 
“nace setting” approach to competition (Yao et al., 2020). Golfers described how they imagined 
the trajectory that their shots would travel and where they would land (Perry et al., 2018). 

The goal of the PPR is for the thoughts and behaviors in the routines to create the feelings that 
lead to the automatic execution of performance. Athletes and exercisers should create the mental 

and physical feelings that they want (e.g., calm and focused, prepared and ready) and develop 

a rhythm for themselves (e.g., bouncing the tennis ball or volleyball prior to serving, or thinking 

“smooth” for the golf swing). Just prior to execution, athletes should have one mental cue that 

locks in the focus they need for optimal performance. Examples include “smooth,” “strong,” or 

“aggressive.” 
Ironically, the steps athletes follow in their PPRs allow them to consciously think about nothing 

at all when performing! That’s what we’re after—a mental plan that leads you to think about nothing 

and perform on autopilot. Keep your PPR simple, and practice it constantly to make it habitual. 



MG 192 Introduction to Kinesiology 

the defense and widely scan the field for open able to perform well. This inward focus then distracts 
receivers. One way to optimize attentional focus, them from the external focus that they need in order 
then, is to regulate one’s arousal level to avoid the to complete the task with full concentration. The 
overarousal that impairs performance by causing second, and more significant, type of self-focused 
attention to become too narrow. attention that leads to choking involves the attempt 

Increases in arousal brought on by stress and to consciously control performance. When people 
pressure can cause another problem with atten- learn skills, they use conscious processing, which 
tional focus. Specifically, arousal and anxiety can means that they think through exactly how to do 
make a person more self-focused, which in turn can the steps needed in order to perform the skill. We 
lead to the dreaded mental phenomenon known also use conscious processing when we try to fix a 
as “choking.” As former tennis champion and cur- problem in our technique, such as working at the 
rent announcer John McEnroe has stated, “When driving range to modify our golf swing. However, 
it comes to choking, the bottom line is that every- when we use conscious processing, high-level 
one does it. The question is: how are you going to performance is not possible. To perform physical 
handle it? Part of being a champion is being able skills at a high level, athletes engage in automatic 
to cope with it better than everyone else” (Goffi, processing, during which they are not paying con- 
1984, pp. 61-62). None of us are immune to this scious attention to how they perform. 
phenomenon; we are all faced with achievement You can think of this mode as a form of auto- 
situations in which we desperately want to per- pilot. When athletes experience flow or peak per- 
form well, only to have our strong need to do so formance, they typically struggle to describe what 
unwittingly derail us. Choking is the sudden or they were thinking or how they did what they 
progressive deterioration of performance below the did. This is the case because they were operating 
typical and expected level of expertise for a person fully on autopilot, which is the performance zone 
performing under pressure, wherein the person is that you want to be in so that your unconscious is 
seemingly incapable of regaining control over his controlling your performance. 
or her performance. The problem is so common Choking, then, occurs when athletes want so 
that the web is full of examples of the biggest and much to perform well that they pay attention to what 
most famous chokes in sport history. Think about they’re doing—that is, they engage in conscious 
a time when you choked under pressure, and con- processing—which disrupts their autopilot and auto- 
sider why it happened. What were you thinking, matic performance response. And boy, do they pay! 
and how did that lead you to choke? Anyone who has choked knows how devastating it 

The increased arousal and anxiety that come with is to try so hard (too hard, in fact) and yet fail. See 
pressure situations can cause two problems with the sidebar about choking for several tips on how 
self-focus. First, people sometimes focus on their to train to reduce choking and how to respond 
perceived inadequacies or fear that they won’t be effectively in situations where choking may occur. 

High Less 
accurate 

Arousal : Le ae 
ee; Moderate Optimal attentional focus Identification of 

peripheral cues 

Athlete processes irrelevant cues 
Low (focus is too broad) More 

| accurate 

LU eH Relationship between attention and arousal—anxiety. 
Reprinted from R.S. Vealey, Coaching for the Inner Edge (Morgantown, WV: Fitness Information Technology, 2005). By permission of R.S. Vealey. 



Chapter 7 |S port and Exercise Psychology 193 

Choking: What Can We Do About It? 

According to Sian Beilock (2010), who has studied choking in sport and other situations, we can 
reduce the tendency to choke, but we cannot eliminate it. It is a very difficult mental state to over- 
come because we must release conscious control of performance. Here are some suggestions 
to reduce choking and to respond effectively when it happens. 

> Get used to it. Practice under many types of pressure, and get used to performing when 
others are watching and judging you. 

Just do it. The Nike slogan works here, as coaches recognize when they try to “ice” shooters 
or placekickers before they perform in high-pressure situations. Taking more time can lead to 
overthinking, which leads to overanalysis and controlled processing (“paralysis by analysis”). 

Distract yourself. lf someone tries to “ice” you, or if you're playing a sport with lulls in perfor- 
mance that allow too much time for thinking, use a preplanned strategy to distract yourself 
from becoming too focused on how you're performing. 

Direct your attention out, not in. Research on college baseball batters found that they per- 
formed best when focusing on where they wanted the ball to go off their bats, as opposed to 
thinking about what their hands were doing or what they wanted the bat to do (Castaneda & 
Gray, 2007). Similarly, elite golfers performed better when they focused on the desired flight 
of their shots, as opposed to thinking about their wrists or the position of the clubface (Bell 
& Hardy, 2009). More generally, many athletes pick an external focal point to look at (prior to 
batting or shooting or serving, for example) so that they can focus their attention on a target 
or on the outcome that they seek (rather than on how to make it happen). 

Use holistic trigger words to cue your performance. Research shows that skilled athletes 
perform better when they focus on more holistic thoughts about their performance (e.g., 
smooth, strong, Sweep) rather than partial descriptions of how to move (e.g., quick hands, 
drive knee, arch back) (Mullen & Hardy, 2010). 

Mindfulness 

Mindfulness is increasingly being used by people Mindfulness is often taught through the practice 
engaged in sport and exercise to enhance their of meditation. You can think of meditation as the 
performance and mental health. Consider the fol- art of focusing 100 percent of your attention on one 
lowing quote by the poet Apollinaire: “Now and thing. To give meditation a try, find a quiet location, 
then it’s good to pause in our pursuit of happiness put yourself in a comfortable yet stable position, 
and just be happy.” This is the point of mindful- and close your eyes. Take several deep breaths, and 
ness, which involves maintaining focus on the try to breathe from your belly (not your chest). Try 
present moment in an open, nonjudgmental way. to maintain a passive attitude, without evaluation or 
The intent of mindfulness is to engage fully in a concern about whether you’re doing it right. When 
present activity without being caught up in worries you have distracting thoughts, simply notice and 
about the future or regrets about the past. acknowledge them, and then let them go. Try to 

Practicing mindfulness has been shown to focus all of your attention on your breathing for 
improve physical health in terms of stress release, 60 seconds (set the timer on your phone). When 
improved sleep, lower blood pressure, and reduced you catch your mind wandering (because it will), 
chronic pain. It is also effective in treating depres- accept that as normal, let those thoughts go, and 
sion, anxiety, substance abuse, and other mental gently refocus your attention on your breathing. 
health disorders. In addition, it is increasingly Don’t worry if you struggle; it often takes a lot of 
used as part of mental training in sport and has practice to meditate for 1 minute. Try this exercise 
been shown to enhance athletes’ performance and throughout the day to restore your mind to the 
well-being (Baltzell, 2016). For example, mindful- present moment and to create a sense of peace 
ness training is a major part of the mental prepa- and a calm focus. Two excellent phone apps to 
ration taught by sport psychology professionals at practice meditation and mindfulness are Headspace 
the U.S. Olympic Training Center. and Calm. 



am 194 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Mindfulness and attentional focus are key skills that athletes must do more than what their bodies 

for any performer in any physical activity, and are used to doing to induce a training effect, such 

these skills are trained through the use of mental as increased strength or endurance. If the overload 

techniques such as imagery and meditation. Other is too great with inadequate recovery, the body 

mental skills that are important for success in phys- becomes overtrained or overwhelmed, fatigued, 

ical activities include confidence, energy manage- and with increased risk of injury. As the social 

ment, self-awareness, and productive thinking. If rewards for sport success and fit bodies have 

you are interested in learning more about mental become more glamorous, many people have come 

skills training, you can find many books and arti- to think that more is better in training. In reality, 

cles, including testimonials from athletes who have people should focus on the quality of training and 

used these methods, in the scholarly and popular know when to push themselves and when to rest 
literature on sport and exercise psychology. and adequately recover. 

Burnout 
To cap off the chapter, this section focuses on a 
topic that is typically of great interest in sport and 
exercise psychology. Burnout has become more 
important because of the pressure we feel in 
modern society to perform, excel, and juggle many 
responsibilities at the same time. 

“I don’t know, I just feel burned out.” How many 
times have you heard this statement from someone? 
What is burnout? Is it the same thing as stress? Is 
it real? Or is it a lack of mental toughness? 

Burnout is real, and here’s what it looks like. 
First, it involves feelings of mental, emotional, and 
physical exhaustion. Second, this exhaustion leads 
to negative moods and feelings (e.g., depression, 
despair) and a negative change in responses to 
other people (e.g., cynicism, aloofness, lack of 
empathy). Third, people experiencing burnout feel 
a lack of accomplishment even if they are quite 
accomplished, thus decreasing their performance 
level and feelings of self-esteem. Fourth, burnout 
causes people to become disillusioned with their 
involvement in an activity, such as sport, their 
career, Or an exercise program. Burnout is a com- 
plex condition that occurs when certain personality 
characteristics of people interact with life stressors. 

To help prevent burnout, coaches and trainers 
should encourage challenge and variety in training. 
For instance, people in fitness programs should 
cross-train in different types of activities—for 
example, biking, hiking, rowing, swimming, and 
perhaps even an activity such as orienteering or 
disc golf. Coaches should also build variety into 

Even youth sport athletes are susceptible to burnout. To 
sport training to break the monotony of repetitive help prevent burnout, children should be exposed to many 
training. In addition, they should help individuals different sports and activities. 
distinguish between overload and overtraining. © iStockphoto/Stuart Hannagan 

Overload is a basic training principle that means 



Chapter 7| Sport and Exercise Psychology 195 a 

Furthermore, most people, especially children, developed over the last four decades is impressive, 
should avoid intense specialization in one activity and researchers continue to study personality, 
to the exclusion of all others. We enhance our motivation, arousal and stress, group processes, 
mental health when we have multifaceted identities and mental skills training in physical activity. Kine- 
or self-concepts with several areas of interest and siologists are committed to extending and applying 
expertise. Finally, burnout is not a sign of weak- this knowledge in order to enhance participation 
ness or a simple response to stress. Athletes and in physical activity for all people. 
those involved in fitness training programs should If you are interested in what you’ve learned 
watch for early signs of staleness and overtraining; so far about sport and exercise psychology, you 
they should try to stay committed in a positive, might want to take an introductory course in the 
passionate way rather than feeling the pressure of subdiscipline, browse through journals in the field, 
having to engage in these activities. and check out the websites of sport psychology 

organizations listed at the end of this chapter. You 
might also want to talk with a professor about 

Wrap-Up career Opportunities in either sport psychology or 

As a relatively young field, sport and exercise psy- exercise psychology. We cannot all be Olympic ath- 

chology has only begun to scratch the surface of letes, but we can all engage in meaningful physical 

understanding the thoughts, feelings, and behaviors activity in order to derive personal fulfillment and 

related to physical activity and enhancing its ben- optimal health and well-being. 

efits. However, the knowledge base that has been 

_MORE INFORMATION ON SPORT AND EXERCISE PSYCHOLOGY 

Organizations 

American Psychological Association 

Association for Applied Sport Psychology 

Canadian Society for Psychomotor Learning and Sport Psychology (SCAPPS) 

Canadian Sport Psychology Association (CSPA) 

International Society of Sport Psychology 

North American Society for the Psychology of Sport and Physical Activity 

Journals 

Case Studies in Sport and Exercise Psychology 

International Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology 

Journal of Applied Sport Psychology 

Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology 

Journal of Sport Psychology in Action 

Sport, Exercise, and Performance Psychology 

The Sport Psychologist 



Wm 196 Introduction to Kinesiology 

ReEVIEW QUESTIONS e 
1. What are the ABCs that are studied by kinesiologists in sport and exercise psychology? 

Identify questions that kinesiologists in this area might study based on these ABCs. 

2. What was significant about Coleman Griffith’s early work in sport psychology? Why did 

the subdiscipline not emerge again until the 1960s, and what important milestone did the 
field achieve in 2020 in terms of national recognition? 

3. Identify the six methods used in sport and exercise psychology research, and provide one 
example of how each is used. 

4. Does sport build character? Why or why not? Does exercise participation improve mental 
health? If so, how? 

5. Explain the four sources, or fuels, for motivation to perform physical activity. Give specific 
examples of how these fuels can be put into practice by leaders in both exercise and sport 
contexts. 

6. Explain cohesion in groups, and discuss how it can facilitate both sport performance and 
exercise adherence. What are some ways in which cohesion can be developed and nurtured 
in groups? 

7. Although no distinctive athlete personality has been identified based on stable traits, what 
mental qualities have been shown to separate successful athletes from less successful ones? 

8. Why do athletes choke? What are some ways in which sport psychology professionals can 
work with athletes to help them avoid the choking experience? 

9. What is imagery, and how can it be used to make the physical activity experience more 
positive for people? 

10. What is mindfulness, and how does the practice of meditation enhance it? 

A | KP ropel ») Go to HKPropel to complete the activities for this chapter. 



Biomechanics 
of Physical Activity 

Kathy Simpson 

In this chapter, we will 

describe what biomechanics is and what it encompasses, : 

explain how biomechanics is ere toi and inc areers in Kinesiology 
and related areas, 

address what biomechanists and related specialists do, 

explain how biomechanics emerged within theees of fp hysical activity, 
and : Se 

introduce biomechanical concepts ond the processes= whch 
biomechanists and professionals in physical activity and related fields : 
answer questions of interest ines se 



Aisha ii s a shelly active, middle-aged famale with aie dese ee ee es 

-__ wearing away of knee cartilage) that is now causing stiffness, pain during certain movements, and 

decreased mobility. She wants to remain active at moderate to high intensity levels. Therefore, she_  

wants to know what she can do to prevent further cartilage degeneration and reduce the Se while 

staying active and fit. To help her, imagine that you are : aia 

_ serving in one of the following professional roles: 

, Sport or personal coach, fitness instructor, : 
= Ot teacher 

= ~ Physical or occupational therapist, athletic 
trainer, or other rehabilitation specialist 

» Medical personnel (ee. orthopedist, nurse 
practitioner) 

) Scientist in the research and reve corer! ' 
S department at a pope that manufactures 
knee braces 

In your role as a kinesiology professional in the 
situation just described, which of the following did Why Use Biomechanics 
you believe important to answering Aisha’s question: of Physical Activity? 
movement technique; potential anatomical problems 
(e.g., knock-knee); injury, training, and physical Biomechanics applies mechanical principles to 

activity history; weight; current footwear; other understand how forces affect an organism’s phys- 

information? If you were to observe or measure ical body (i.e., its structure) and the organism’s 

Aisha’s movements, how would you know if they ability to carry out its functions (i.e., pursue its 

posed a concern? How would you know whether purposes or goals) (Atwater, 1980; Hatze, 1974; 

information obtained from other sources was valid? Winter, 1985). Mechanics is the branch of physics 

Kinesiology professionals use biomechanics to that documents motion (kinematics) and the causes 

answer questions such as Aisha’s by incorporating of motion (kinetics). Within that branch, the field of 

assessments of her movements and other informa- biomechanics encompasses the study of any living 

tion with research-based biomechanical knowledge organism, be it bacteria, fungi, plant, animal, or 

of the factors affecting knee osteoarthritis. We will human. Biomechanics can be applied to any part of 

consider Aisha’s situation throughout this chapter. an organism or to the entire organism. Because we 

Your opinions may shift as you learn about biome- focus here on biomechanics of physical activity—a 

chanics and, later, knee OA. subdiscipline of kinesiology—we use the term body 

Goals of Biomechanics 

> To understand how the basic laws of mechanical physics and engineering affect and shape 
the structure and function of the human body 

> To apply this understanding to (a) improve the outcomes of our movements (i.e., performance 
effectiveness) or (b) increase or maintain the safety and health of our tissues 



Chapter 8| Biomechanics of Physical Activity 199 

to refer either to the entire human body or to any 
part of it (e.g., heart, muscle, leg). 

Let’s explore this definition of biomechanics and 
why biomechanics is useful. When Aisha exercises, 
one function that her heart must accomplish is 
pumping blood throughout her body. Meanwhile, her 
skeletal muscles function to move her body. For exam- 
ple, functions of her tibia (ower leg bone) include 
holding up her body and serving as a structure for 
muscles to pull against in order to create movement 
such as running. The tibia’s structure consists of its 
anatomy, including its compositional elements (e.g., 
bone cells, minerals, proteins, water, marrow, connec- 
tive tissue) and the way in which those elements are 
put together and shaped. The tibia is shaped like a 
slightly bowed rod, with dense, compact bone on the 
outer part for strength and porous bone inside, which 
is arranged to help keep the marrow in place and 
reduce bone weight. This combination of structural 
elements allows the tibia to be lightweight enough 
to move rapidly yet also to resist considerable force 
when muscles pull on it or when a performer hits 
the ground hard when landing. 

Our structures help us to function—for example, 
to breathe, run, text, and eat. Conversely, our move- 
ment (i.e., our functioning) affects our structure. For 
example, if we engage in heavy physical activity for 
months, then our tendons get thicker and stronger. 

Forces are needed in order to accomplish any task 
involving movement; they also help us maintain the 
health of our body structures. A force consists of a 
push or a pull on an object or body. To kick a ball, 
for instance, you must apply force to the ball with 
your foot. For a hip replacement patient to stand up, 
she must be able to create muscle forces to push 
herself upward. Forces also are used by microscopic 
elements (e.g., proteins), cells, muscles, bones, 
connective tissues, and organs to accomplish their Fbyack thigh Front thigh 

muscles muscles 
functions. For example, the heart muscle creates 
force to pump blood. If we engage in enough phys- 
ical activity—whereby forces are applied to bones, 
connective tissues, and muscles—then these tissues Tibia 

become stronger and better able to carry out their 
functions. The converse is also true—that is, disuse 
weakens body tissues. In addition, excessive or repet- 
itive forces with inadequate rest can injure tissues, 
as in the brain cell damage that can be caused by a 
head impact. Fioot 

The forces commonly involved in physical activ- 
ity include those that you likely know about, such 
as air resistance, gravity, and friction (see figure GSE] Some typical forces that influence body 
8.1). You have also experienced forces applied by structure and function (including movement): (a) forces 

another object (e.g., the ground) or person (e.g., applied to us by another object; (b) forces that we apply 

collision with an opponent), as well as forces that to another object in order to manipulate its motion; and 

you applied to another object (e.g., when lifting (c) forces acting on a bone (the tibia). 



Mg 200 Introduction to Kinesiology 

an object). Finally, you experience forces generated as far and fast as possible), why do humans 
inside of your body (e.g., muscle forces pulling often generate muscle force in a sequential 

on bone, bones pushing or rubbing against one pattern, starting from the trunk muscles, 

another at a joint). moving outward down the arm, and ending 

Mechanical laws of physics and engineering with the hand muscles—like a whip? 

are principles that explain how force is generated * How are the structure and flexibility of 
or manipulated or how force affects a system’s connective tissues affected by mechanical 
structure or function (e.g., produces movement). loading factors, such as the speed and dura- 
Newton’s law of acceleration tells us that a system’s tion of stretching? 
acceleration is greater when more total force in a ¢ What trunk movements apply the most and 
direction acts on the system or when the system 

least force to different spinal tissues? 
has less mass. Thus, at the start of a sprint race, 
when high acceleration is needed, Aisha will want The second goal is to use theory and biomechan- 
to generate as much muscle force as possible and ical research to find answers to real-life questions 
carry only minimal excess fat mass. Another prin- and determine whether the theories work in real- 
ciple holds that if the amount of force applied to life conditions or whether new theories are needed. 
a structure exceeds a certain limit, then permanent Here are some examples of practical research 
damage occurs. This principle explains how certain questions asked by biomechanists in kinesiology: 
injuries occur in bone, muscle, and connective 

¢ What weight-training exercises and loads 
tissue—for example, mild and moderate ankle 

are best for improving my client’s sport 
sprains. 

performance? 

¢ How doI know when it is safe for a student 

ReEE ON eee  who had a moderately serious knee-liga- 
ment injury to return to physical education 

Force is needed to (a) produce and contro! our move- 
or dance class or to competitive sport? 

ments and (b) maintain or improve the health of our 
tissues. Excessive amounts or repetitions of force, e Should my patient, whose arm trembles 

when eating, use a heavier spoon to dampen 
however, can injure tissues. 

some of the trembling effects and produce 
smoother hand movements? 

Biomechanics as a subdiscipline of kinesiology e¢ What can my client and I do to prevent her 
is often called human movement biomechanics. from sustaining another back injury at work? 
This is only one of several specialized areas in the 

¢ How can I convince coaches to purchase 
field of biomechanics. Examples of other special- 

our company’s protective gear when they 
izations include nanobiomechanics (forces and 

assume that the gear will hinder athletes’ 
movements at the molecular level) and animal, 

movements? 
dental, plant, and forensic biomechanics (Hum- 

phrey, 2003). Human movement biomechanics can If you become a kinesiology professional, biome- 
include or overlap other specialization areas, such chanical knowledge will help you answer ques- 
as sport and dance, orthopedic (muscle, connective, tions about improving performance effectiveness, 
and bone tissue), and clinical biomechanics, which increasing the health of tissues, preventing and 
focuses on issues related to persons with medical treating injuries, selecting or modifying assistive 
concerns, movement disorders, or injury problems. devices or joint or tissue replacements, and modi- 

fying sport equipment or rules in order to ensure 

Goals of Human Movement Biomechanics safety. 
The performance of any person can be improved 

Human movement biomechanics has two main 
in almost any situation that involves physical activ- 

goals: discovery and application. The first goal is 
ity—for example, repetitive work tasks, activities of 

to discover the fundamental, universal theories 
daily living, exercise, occupational or sport training, 

that explain how forces affect our movements and sport performance, music playing, dance, and even 
our bodies’ structures. Here are some examples of lying in bed. If we understand how living organisms 
fundamental theoretical questions: can best exploit the mechanical laws that govern 

¢ In making maximal-effort arm movements how motion is controlled, then we can intelligently 
(e.g., throwing, striking, projecting an object select the best movement techniques for a given 



Chapter 8| Biomechanics of Physical Activity 

performer to use in completing a certain movement What Do | Need to Know to Use 
task. For example, a coach can determine whether 
a new technique may truly enhance performance Biomechanics Professionally? 
or is merely a fad that offers little benefit. An occu- Most kinesiology degree-program specializations 
pational therapist can apply biomechanics in order require at least one biomechanics course. In it, you 
to determine how to help a client with a neuro- will learn to apply the mechanical principles for 
muscular disorder adapt his or her movements or manipulating movement, as well as other principles 
use an assistive device (e.g., modified spoon) to that can affect tissue health. You will also learn 
perform daily movements. how to use practical methods and tools to answer 

We can also improve the health and safety of human movement questions related to assessing 
a person’s tissues. For instance, rehabilitation and or improving performance effectiveness or tissue 
training exercises are most effective if we have the- health, including injury prevention (Abraham et 
oretical and practical knowledge of how tissues are al., 2018). Because it takes considerable time and 
affected by conditions related to the application of money to obtain most biomechanical measure- 
force (e.g., speed of movement, amount of force). ments (see the section titled Research Methods 
This knowledge also helps us understand how to for Biomechanics later in this chapter), most 
reduce the risk of movement-related tissue injuries biomechanical assessments and diagnoses made 
that can occur during work, daily life, and other by kinesiology professionals involve qualitative 
physical activity. Consider this injury prevention judgments based on observation (Knudson, 2013). 
question: Does stretching before we engage in Practitioners and biomechanists often apply 
strenuous physical activity reduce the risk of injury? biomechanics in conjunction with knowledge from 
See the sidebar on stretching for an answer. other disciplines and subdisciplines of kinesiology 

Performance and tissue health can also be (Knudson, 2013). For instance, anatomy, exercise 

affected by the equipment and flooring that we use physiology, and motor behavior are crucial to 
during human movement. Of course, the equipment understanding how our body structures produce 
can vary widely, ranging from bats to assistive movement. A kinesiology professional recognizes 
devices (e.g., wheelchairs, braces) to footwear and that our movements are also affected by psycholog- 
headgear. Biomechanical researchers can establish ical, sociological, and cultural factors. Consider the 

optimal characteristics for such equipment, includ- question of why female athletes have a higher rate 
ing size, weight, racket shape, and characteristics of anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) knee injury than 

of prosthetic limbs. In terms of flooring, we can do equally skilled male athletes (Hughes, 2014). 
use spring-loaded floors and mats in gyms and Does this difference relate to sex differences in 
dance studios to reduce impact forces on the body anatomy (answer: possibly) that cause females to 
during landings. land in a more “knock-kneed” position (yes, but 

Does Stretching Before Activity Prevent Injury? 

You may have seen people get ready for physical activity by stretching and doing nothing else. 
They hold a stretch for a bit, then go on to the next static stretch. This type of stretching does not 
reduce one’s risk of muscular or connective tissue injury during subsequent activity. In fact, if a 
warm-up consists only of static stretches, it neither reduces the risk of injury (Behm et al., 2016; 
Magnusson & Renstrom, 2006; Pope et al., 2000) nor enhances performance (Behm et al., 2016; 
Junior et al., 2017; Knudson & Noffal, 2005; Simic et al., 2013). 

A systematic review of well-done research, addressing many types of flexibility exercise proto- 
cols, showed mixed results depending on several factors, such as type of stretch and sequence 

of movements (Behm et al., 2016). So, what to do? The authors deduced that performing an 

appropriate warm-up prior to dynamic stretching—that is, stretching with slow movements after 

doing general movements, such as light jogging—might reduce injury risk in muscle connective 

tissue and increase joint motion without reducing muscle force production during subsequent 

physical activity. In your own experience, do you believe this warm-up strategy helped you reduce 

the risk of muscle pulls or connective tissue tears? 



Me 202 Introduction to Kinesiology 

not necessarily due to anatomy)? Or does it relate type of biomechanist may be hired, for example, by 

to effects of female hormone levels on ligaments national-level athletic teams and dance companies 

(some contribution), or to gender differences in to work with their performers as a consultant. 

coaching (limited evidence), or to other cultural Biomechanists may also work in occupational 
influences that affect how certain females perform settings as ergonomists or human factors engi- 

movements or generate muscle force (limited evi- neers. Some ergonomists work in research and 

dence)? We would better understand the causes development departments as part of a team of 
of ACL injury, and thus, how to prevent it, if this people who design equipment such as gardening 
question were pursued not just in biomechanics but tools, commercial airplanes, factory equipment, and 
in an interdisciplinary fashion involving researchers office furniture. Others may work for specialized 
from many subdisciplines of kinesiology. ergonomics-focused corporations that perform 

job-site analyses. These analyses involve evaluating 
how and why employees perform their work tasks. 

REV BON Soe ee Se ek The ergonomist generates data and then recom- 

Biomechanics is a helpful tool when answering a pro- mends appropriate modifications in tasks, equip- 

fessional question of interest in kinesiology. Moreover, ment, employee training, or incentives in order to 

incorporating knowledge from other kinesiology areas encourage employees to modify their behaviors 
in ways that improve their safety or efficiency. 

with understanding of the client or performer provides 
Meister (1999, p. 21) views human factors (in the 

better answers to a biomechanical question. 
North American terminology) and ergonomics (in 
the European terminology) as one field that covers 
“everything relating the human to technology.” 

What Do Biomechanists Do? Forensic biomechanists use biomechanical 

Career opportunities in biomechanics include such knowledge and principles to answer questions 

positions as researcher, clinical biomechanist, sport related to civil and criminal lawsuits (Schneck, 

performance specialist, ergonomist, forensic biome- 2005). For example, a forensic biomechanist might 

chanist, and university professor. Related positions be hired as an expert witness in a civil lawsuit to 

include certified orthotist and certified prosthetist. testify about whether a biomechanical basis exists 

Biomechanics researchers work in biomechanics for an alleged work-related injury. Suppose that 

laboratories, where they perform experiments that an employee develops a back injury and sues the 

address problems of interest to various industries employer. The employee alleges that the injury was 

or assist with product development. For example, caused by having to lift excessively heavy boxes of 
to design better footwear, a biomechanist working materials. The forensic biomechanist would try to 
at a footwear corporation would collaborate with determine whether the back-muscle forces required 
design engineers to understand the interaction when performing the lifting task correctly exceed 
between people’s anatomy, the way they move, and the maximums allowed by government standards 
the forces that act on them. A clinical biomechanist and are high enough to injure this employee. 
in a biomechanics laboratory at a hospital might The biomechanist would also have to determine 
work with physicians and therapists to understand whether it is likely that other factors caused or 
how best to help patients regain normal walking contributed to the injury, such as failing to use safe 
patterns with medical treatment. The clinical bio- lifting techniques taught to workers. 
mechanist might also be expected to collaborate Clinical biomechanists who work in medical 
on research with physicians. settings, such as research hospitals that include 

A performance enhancement biomechanist might biomechanics laboratories, perform biomechanical 
work with collegiate athletes, elite athletes, or pro- analyses of patients or research participants so that 
fessional teams and their coaching staffs in order to physical therapists and physicians can determine 
improve athletes’ performance. For example, a bio- treatment. For example, several Shriners hospitals 
mechanics company or sports medicine clinic could have a biomechanical gait analysis laboratory. In 
operate a facility in which biomechanists analyze this setting, the surgeon, physical therapist, and 
athletes’ techniques to assess performance effective- biomechanist work together to assess whether a 
ness or detect injury-related errors. Several academic child with a disorder (e.g., cerebral palsy) requires 
biomechanists have founded their own companies, treatment. If the child does receive treatment (e.g., 
which offer access to equipment, software, testing, surgery, physical therapy), they then work together 
and consultation in forensic biomechanics. This to determine whether the treatment sufficiently 



Chapter 8| Biomechanics of Physical Activity 203 

Marika Walker 
Marika Walker became interested and involved in biomechan- 
ics by an unusual route. During high school, after visiting the 
headquarters and research labs of a major sports apparel 
company, she thought, “Being a researcher in a sport company 
like this one—that’s perfect. | would get to blend my love of 
sport, science, technology, engineering, and math in this type 
of work.” Her career interests and path changed over time. 
She conducted research as an engineering intern at Nike and, 
as a master’s student researcher, in a textile research center. 
During her doctoral degree work at the University of Georgia, 
Marika combined her interest in sport product development and 
human movement biomechanics by investigating how different 
rib protector designs influenced the throwing performance of 
American football quarterbacks. She also investigated whether 
a stiffer protector would cause the quarterbacks to feel less 

a — 
MOVEMENT Aca, able to throw effectively. Dr. Walker is now a senior associate 

in biomechanics at EXponent, an engineering and scientific con- 
~ © Marika Walker. sulting group (https://www.exponent.com/ professionals/w/ 

walker-marika). Dr. Walker also has formed a company, ADEPT 
Movement Academy, whose mission is to improve athletic performance and reduce 

injury prevalence. Her goal is to educate coaches and performers on foundational biomechanical 
principles that underlie optimal technique and learn how to apply those principles when analyzing 
and correcting movements. 

improved the child’s ability to walk. The biome- Many biomechanists work in college or uni- 
chanist’s responsibility is to perform and interpret versity departments of kinesiology, engineering, 
the gait analysis and report the findings to the medicine, or other disciplines. A professor in a 
treatment team. kinesiology department teaches biomechanics to 

Although prosthetists and orthotists are not bio- students with interests in a variety of fields related 
mechanists, they use many biomechanical concepts to physical activity, rehabilitation, or medicine. 
and methods. Prosthetists and other professionals The professor also conducts research in an area 
(e.g., physical therapists, podiatrists) sometimes of biomechanics. Some biomechanists may also 
also become certified orthotists. A prosthetist’s main be clinicians and integrate patient care with their 
focus is to help a client obtain and use a replacement research and teaching. 
body part, such as an artificial hand. Orthotists, on 
the other hand, assess a client’s body structure and 
function to understand what may be preventing a History of Biomechanics 
body part from completing its tasks effectively. For Throughout history—both for practical purposes 
instance, injury or pain can result from anatomical such as survival and to satisfy our innate need to 
deviations, which in children may result from abnor- know and understand—we humans have been 
mal bone growth, improper muscle functioning, applying natural laws (often unknowingly) to 
neural defect, or some combination of these factors. investigate the structure and function of living 
The orthotist then fits the patient with an orthosis, organisms. The field of biomechanics, however, is 
a limb-supporting device such as a molded plastic relatively young. 
brace that holds a child’s foot in the proper posi- 

tion. Prosthetists and orthotists also reassess their 
Setting the Stage 

clients’ movements, watch for potential problems 

(e.g., injury, skin issues, ineffective movements), Interest in how the body moved and in its structure 

and make adjustments as needed. was influenced by the science, math, and medical 



Ma 204 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Does a Career in Biomechanics Interest You? 

To determine whether you're interested in a career in biomechanics, answer the following questions: 

Do you like observing and analyzing how people move? 

Do you find yourself trying to figure out a better way to perform a task? 

Do you enjoy trying to solve puzzles? 

WNOSNAFS.  Do you like the idea of applying the biology, physics, and math that you've learned to move- 

ment situations of interest? 

» Do you enjoy using your mathematical skills? 

> Are you interested in investigating the internal structures of the body, such as tendons, to 
determine how they act and are affected by factors such as exercise? 

If you answered yes to some of these questions, consult the website of the International Society 
of Biomechanics for information about the field of biomechanicsj,o b opportunities, graduate pro- 
grams, and biomechanists available for contact. You can also talk with biomechanics professors 
to help you identify programs aligned with your interests. 

contributions of Middle Eastern, African, Near East- 
ern, Asian, and Greco-Roman civilizations beginning TAB V LA TERTIAG 
thousands of years ago. This interest was renewed ee yo Yel 

fag, 
with the scientific Renaissance in Europe. You may be 
familiar with the name René Descartes (1596-1650). 
Although he was a mathematician, he strongly hoped 
to understand the human body in order to cure dis- 
ease and slow down aging. He found no cures for 
disease or aging, but he did conclude that the physical 
body was simply a machine that could maintain itself 
without assistance from a soul or essential being. 
Another Renaissance example is Giovanni Alfonso 
Borelli (1608-1679), who is considered by some to be 
the founder of biomechanics. He understood correctly 
how muscles act and use leverage to move the body, 
and he discovered how to calculate forces acting on 
or produced by organs (Pope, 2005). 

This view of body structure and function estab- 
lished the philosophy that our bodies act simply as 
machines, a notion that still influences biomechani- 
cal thinking today. For instance, we might view the 
heart as a pump or consider how we might improve 
the “leverage” of the outside hip muscles in order 
to help patients after hip replacement surgery. At 
the same time, we now also know that movement 
is influenced by more than peoples’ structures. 

Beginnings of the Subdiscipline 
of Biomechanics 

This drawing by Giovanni Alfonso Borelli 
By the late 1800s and early 1900s, rapid progress compares the move- 

ment of human appendages to pulley systems using princi- 
in both knowledge and technology had made the 

ples of mechanics and statics. 
time right for kinesiological sciences, including bio- 

Courtesy of the Library of Congress, LC-USZ62-95253 
mechanics, to bloom. Concurrently, the Efficiency 



Chapter 8| Biomechanics of Physical Activity 

Movement (late 1890s to early 1930s), popular in that time, Ruth Glassow and her students at the 
industrial countries, was thought to reduce waste University of Wisconsin began three decades of 
and improve the quality of life (and increase profit work to classify activities into categories such as 
for business owners). Frederick Winslow Taylor, locomotion, throwing, striking, and balance. They 
an American engineer and a leader of the move- also quantified movements (e.g., joint motions) 
ment, scientifically studied the motions and time using Glassow’s pioneering high-speed filmanal- 
requirements of work tasks and generated princi- ysis technology, and they applied fundamental 
ples for increasing workers’ efficiency in order to principles of mechanics to understand the skills 
improve productivity—for example, using certain in each category (Atwater, 1980). Glassow used 
movement techniques to reduce muscle fatigue this knowledge to develop learning objectives for 
(Taylor, 1911). Taylor-style efficiency analyses may teaching physical education long before this prac- 
have been some of the first assessments of human tice became common in education (Sloan, 1987). 
movement based on quantitative movement data. Many research leaders in university kinesiology 
Taylorism also laid the foundation for the field of programs in the 1930s and 1940s came from areas 
ergonomics (occupational biomechanics) or human outside of kinesiology (e.g., medicine). Those who 
factors engineering, and efficiency analyses began researched questions that were best answered by 
to be applied to sport movements in the 1920s. biomechanics, such as Glassow, had a profound 

In Russia, Taylor’s ideas influenced Vsevolod Mey- effect on human movement biomechanics. They 
erhold, who was perhaps the first to use the term 
biomechanics, although its meaning then differed 
somewhat from that of today. Meyerhold was an inno- 
vative but controversial theater director who viewed 
movement as the most powerful mode of theatrical 
expression (Cash, 2015). He developed his version of 
biomechanics between 1913 and 1922 as a method of 
acting and theater production that integrated “laws of 
biomechanics” (from mechanical physics) with other 
components such as movement efficiency, balance, 
coordination, and rhythm (Pitches, 2004). 

The development of biomechanics and other kine- 
siology subdisciplines in physical education, sport, 
and dance applications began in the very late 1800s 
and early 1900s. In the United States, two Swedish 
men (Posse, 1890; Skarstrom, 1909) interested in 
gymnastics were among the first to apply the term 
kinesiology (initially used in North America instead 
of biomechanics) to the analysis of muscles and 
movements in an education setting (Atwater, 1980). 
Posse’s and Skarstrom’s definition of kinesiology as the 
mechanical analysis of muscles and movements is still 
used today in some allied health and medical fields. 

ANS GHU oe ee 
Human movement biomechanics was initially called 
kinesiology (primarily in the United States) in the 
late 1800s and early 1900s. The term biomechanics 
later became the accepted name for the entire field of Neco. ses 

biomechanics with its current definition. 
Ruth Glassow was one of several early biomechanists who 
profoundly affected the field. Her groundbreaking work 
helped to lay the foundation for the biomechanical under- 

Mechanical analyses of basic movements were 
standing of human movements. 

not emphasized as part of the formal training 
University of Wisconsin—Madison Archives 

of dance and physical educators until 1923. At 



a 206 Introduction to Kinesiology 

were the first modern scientists to answer such of the first studies of the kinetics (net moments at 

questions, which required them to develop the joints) of human walking noted that their study 

needed research methodology and tools. They also required over 10,000 hours of hand graphing and 

educated the first specialized biomechanists and calculation by grad students to complete (Elftman, 

were among the first professors to teach kinesiol- 1939, or Bressler & Frankel, 1950)! 

ogy preprofessionals how to use biomechanical Now, we are beginning to understand better the 

principles. true motions of bones, limbs, and the spine with a 
level of accuracy not possible before. We can also 

Era of Contemporary Biomechanics simulate movements of the entire human body 
and of animals (see Computer Modeling and Sim- 

In the 1960s, biomechanics began to get established ulations in this chapter), and we can predict loads 
as a scholarly area and a recognized subdiscipline on tissues such as ligaments (Seth et al., 2018). 
of university kinesiology programs. Newly created Simulations allow a practitioner or researcher to 
scientific societies and journals for biomechanics ask questions that are difficult to answer using 
produced the first generation of an international actual performers. Any number of questions about 
community of biomechanics researchers. In addi- why and how the body moves as it does, how tis- 
tion, biomechanics courses and graduate-level sues respond to exercise and activity, and how to 
university programs (Atwater, 1980) created improve movement or surgical outcomes are being 
pathways in the field of kinesiology for learning investigated. 
biomechanics or becoming a biomechanist. Since 
then, the world has seen a rapid expansion in the 
number and scope of national and international Research Methods for Biomechanics 
professional organizations and university programs 

What tools do biomechanists use to accomplish 
in biomechanics (see the International Society of 

the goals of the field? For example, how do they 
Biomechanics’ website). Moreover, the many areas 

perform gait analyses, research the cushioning 
of biomechanics are now represented in these 

properties of newly designed shoes, analyze the 
organizations and can be studied not only in kine- 

performance of Olympic athletes, and perform 
siology but also in other disciplines. 

research to answer fundamental questions about 
how we move? In the pursuit of answers to such 

EKEC PON questions, biomechanics research has benefited 
greatly from technological advances. 

The era of contemporary biomechanics began in the 
What tools could you use to measure move- 

late 1960s. Many biomechanists from kinesiology ments made or forces generated by a performer? 
contributed to the development of biomechanics as a Examples that may come to mind include timer 
new area of scholarly study. and camera devices and apps for measuring time 

and motion; barbells and free weights for measur- 
ing lifting force; and tape measures for measuring 

Era of Low-Cost Computer Technology distances or lengths. In addition, a variety of sports 

Biomechanical research and applications have equipment (e.g., bats, basketballs, footballs, golf 

flourished since advances in low-cost computing clubs) can now be equipped with sensors and 

and memory began moving rapidly in the 1980s. software to indicate the equipment’s speed and 

Biomechanics research was painstakingly slow perhaps its accuracy. With high-speed video and 

prior to this time. Much work had to be done by still images and simple phone apps, you can also 

hand, with very limited access to computers, no measure the body’s speed and direction of travel 

Internet, and bulky analog electronic equipment. and the distance that a limb traveled, quantify body 

Imagine having to track by hand the location of movements and positions such as knee-joint angles 

every major joint in the body, for every frame of during running, and assess trunk flexibility. Biome- 

film or video of a performer’s movement. One chanical researchers have used many tools, ranging 

performance could take hours to track. Multiply from the ones listed here to more sophisticated 

that by many repetitions of a movement and sev- systems. Figure 8.2 shows parts of instrumentation 

eral performers, and you can see that it could take systems typically used in a biomechanics laboratory 
hundreds of hours just to track the movements of for research, clinical, ergonomic, performance, or 

all the participants of a research study. This resulted other types of analysis. 

in simplistic analyses of complex movements. One 



Chapter 8| Biomechanics of Physical Activity 207 | 

FIC #4 Biomechanical instrumentation. Compo- 
nents for motion measurement include (a) a digital, 
high-speed camera that tracks the location of reflective 
markers identical to those used in video game and 
movie animations; (b) microelectromechanical systems 
(MEMS) sensors that track body movements via min- 
iature gyroscopes, accelerometers, and magnetic field 
detectors; (c) electrodes used in electromyography to 
measure electrical activation of muscle; and (d) force 
platforms used to measure ground reaction forces. 
Photos a, c, and d © Kathy J. Simpson; photo 6 courtesy of XSENS. 

Motion Measurement Devices 
Did you know that animation methods used in 

to reconstruct movement. MEMS sensors, like those 
video-game and movie production often begin with in a smartphone and in some sports equipment, 
biomechanical technology? The use of cameras and combine miniature mechanical sensors (e.g., gyro- 
other motion-detection technology is called motion scopes) with microcircuitry on a tiny chip. MEMS 
capture (or mocap for short). Digital high-speed sensors used for mocap detect some combination 
cameras are used to trace the motion of reflective of the following factors: acceleration, gravity, mag- 
markers placed at selected points on a human body netic fields, and gyroscopic data. When one MEMS 
in order to reconstruct the motion of the various unit is attached to each body segment of interest 
body segments. Mocap without sensors relies on (e.g., head, arm), the movements of those segments 
software to track the contours of a performer’s body can be calculated. In addition, mocap achieved 



MG 208 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Research and Evidence-Based Practice in Kinesiology 
Do Knee Injury Prevention Programs Work? 

The knee joint is the second most injured body region in sport (Joseph et al., 2013), and injury most 

often occurs during-a landing or some type of stop-and-go movement. Knee ligament injuries can 

require expensive surgery and substantial recovery time, and they often lead to osteoarthritis within 

10 years postinjury (see Nessler et al., 2017, for review). It appears that appropriate movement 

technique, combined with the ability to quickly generate knee muscle forces to stabilize the knee 

joint, can reduce forces on the knee ligaments and excessive stretching that cause ligament tears. 

Based on this body of biomechanical research, the National Athletic Training Association (NATA) 

now recommends incorporating at least three of the following types of exercises into a knee-lig- 

ament injury prevention program: strength, plyometrics (dynamic-strength whole-body movement 

exercises), agility, balance, and flexibility, along with feedback on proper exercise technique (Padua 

et al., 2018). But do these programs work? 
Yes! Huang et al. (2020) reviewed evidence from only the highest-quality studies that met the 

NATA recommendations and found that most of the programs incorporated plyometrics, strength- 
ening, and agility exercises along with feedback on proper landing technique. Encouragingly, they 
found that these programs reduced knee ligament injury rates by 53 percent. 

through modified laser technology is used in some high pressure applied to human tissue can cause 
commercial games (e.g., Kinect, Move, Wii). health problems. For example, in a person with 

For research purposes, mocap output can be diabetes who cannot sense foot pain, too much 
used to understand movements or to provide feed- pressure repeatedly placed on one area of the foot 
back to performers about their movements in many can cause the skin in that area to deteriorate and 
activities, such as sport, dance, music, and physical become infected. Therefore, identifying high-pres- 
rehabilitation. This technology can also be used to sure areas on the feet of a patient with diabetes 
help practitioners analyze movements observed helps the clinician to tailor a shoe insert to spread 
in occupational and clinical settings in order to the forces more evenly and thus prevent further 
improve people’s functioning or prevent injury. tissue damage (Bus et al., 2016). Pressure devices 

can also be placed on wheelchair seats to test seat 

Force Measurement Devices cushions in order to minimize pressure on patients 
who have little sensation in the lower body. 

When we need to know what is affecting a per- Because of the difficulty of directly measuring 
former’s movement or contributing to injury, we 

muscle forces, motion and force platform data 
can measure quantities related to force. To measure 

are used to calculate estimates of muscle forces 
the force placed on a joint, ligament, or object, tiny using biomechanical models. Another method of 
force-measuring devices (force transducers) can be 

estimating muscle forces involves measuring the 
surgically attached to or inserted into living tissues, 

electrical activity of the membranes of the muscle 
artificial joints, or nonliving tissues. Transducers 

cells (fibers) when nerve cells stimulate them to 
can also be used to measure how much force a 

contract. This method, called electromyography 
patient can exert against a strength-measuring 

(EMG), uses electrodes placed on or in muscles 
device. For instance, force platforms can be used to 

to record their electrical activity. The amount of 
measure ground reaction force (GRF) and moments 

electrical activity generated is a measure of muscle 
of force (rotary effects of force) when a performer 

activation and can be converted into an estimation 
applies force to the ground; this approach can 

of muscle force when calculated using a math- 
help diagnose postural and balance disorders. GRF 

ematical model of human anatomy and muscle 
values are also used in calculating internal force 

biomechanical properties. 
loading on bones and cartilage during weight-bear- 

EMG also is used for other purposes, such as 
ing movements by means of various biomechanical 

identifying muscles that are active during a partic- 
models and laws of mechanics. 

ular movement so that we know which muscles to 
Pressure is determined by the amount of force 

target for training. Understanding muscle activation 
applied to a given amount of surface area. Areas of 

(timing and intensity) has allowed researchers to 



Chapter 8 |B iomechanics of Physical Activity 

About! 

Lelaaoa Be aSsad SY ae 
# D:\nover\noviile\dote\pedar\pat_with_L.sol 

35) Pressure picture a) Pressure picture 

0207 413620 wT 1008 
ma 

Wott 1033.3m a 
fight ~1 008.0 rma 

7 aa i eno ea 4008 

www.novel.de He = 

Pressure distributions on the bottoms of the feet during walking at one instant in time. 

Photo courtesy of Novel Electronics Inc. 

build a wearable device that stimulates the appro- Another approach is to use computer simulations 
priate muscles with electricity at the right time, thus to create virtual humans or other systems. Simu- 
enabling a person with paralysis or with powered lations can help us understand basic mechanics 
prostheses to walk. Electromyography can also be at the cellular, molecular, and whole-body levels. 
used by neurologists to assess whether muscles They also allow us to try out hypothetical scenarios. 
and nerves are functioning incorrectly. For example, simulated motion of the knee 

joint can be used to model the anatomy and forces 

Computer Modeling and Simulations involved in various structures (e.g., ligament, 
tendon, cartilage, bone, muscle), thus helping us to 

All of the instrumentation described in the previ- understand typical motion in the knee joint. We can 
ous paragraphs measures one quantity or another. then change the model’s knee joint alignment to 
However, many internal biomechanical quantities understand how poor knee alignment contributes 
(e.g., joint angles, muscle forces) cannot be directly to degeneration of knees with OA. For instance, a 
or easily measured; therefore, they must be derived sport biomechanist could change the aerial tech- 
through mathematical computations. Often, these nique of a virtual gymnast and watch the resulting 
techniques also require mathematical models of performance to assess safety before having real 
the body’s anatomy and other structures, such as gymnasts try the technique. 
muscle attachment locations and bone lengths 
(see photo that shows a model of the lower body). 

| How Do You Measure Up? | 

What instrumentation would you like to use to help answer a biomechanical question that you 

have? Returning to the chapter-opening scenario, what instrumentation could be used to assess 

the movements of Aisha’s leg with OA and her healthy leg? 



Ma 210 Introduction to Kinesiology 

the ball from behind the head or from chest height; 
Time 0.438 e 
Speed 1 = 0.000 ida 4) > te others used a variety of one-hand form, including 

a technique typically used by stand-up players. 

The rules dictate that there must be players with 
differing levels of upper body muscle function 
in the game at all times. Thus, some players had 
only partial use of their arms, while others had 
complete use of trunk and arm muscles. Hence, 
what movement technique is the most effective? 
Are any of these techniques more likely to cause 
injury than others? These situations are examples 
of two major questions to be explored: Why do we 
move in certain ways and not others? Is there such 
a thing as the perfect movement technique, or is 
there a range of optimal technique, given certain 

tion: normasl_gstt toma dels Both Li conditions? 

Model of the lower body used to investigate research questions 
related to gait, or walking. The red lines represent muscles. Moving Masterfully 
Courtesy of He Wang. “Why do people move the way they do?” “Is there a 

best technique for performing a given movement?” 
These are two of the biggest questions in human 
movement biomechanics, and practitioners must 

@ JointTrack consider them carefully, regardless of whether 
they are working with clients or designing new 
equipment or assistive devices. 

Movement technique involves using precise 
body positions and movements in a prescribed 
manner with proper timing. For example, for a 
squat exercise, you might position your feet shoul- 
der-width apart and then bend at your hips, knees, 
and ankles without arching your back. Even before 
thinking about technique, however, we must always 
remember that how and why we move as we do is 
shaped by specific characteristics in the following 
five categories: task, performer goal, performer 
characteristics, environment, and laws of nature 
(including biomechanics). In addition, these factors 
interact with each other. Let’s consider an example. 

Modeling the movements of a knee joint implanted with a A shooting task for our basketball players shapes 
partial knee replacement. how they move because it reduces the possible 
Courtesy of Yang-Chieh Fu. movements to those that can be done from a 

wheelchair. The performer’s goal in this situation 
is to get the ball through the basket. Performer 
characteristics can include anything related to 

Overview of Knowledge the performer: available musculature, arm length, 

in Biomechanics emotions, motivation, skill level, strength, and 
culture. For example, the player’s arms can move 

Much of biomechanics consists of learning why and only in certain directions because bone and muscle 
how to apply the mechanical laws of physics and structures constrain possible movements. Another 
engineering in order to answer questions about factor is the environment, anything outside of 
movement or tissue health. Contemplate this: While the performer; in this case, the wheelchair, other 
watching players at a national basketball tourna- players, rules, and the cheering crowd. Relevant 
ment for players using wheelchairs, I noticed that laws of nature include physical principles, such 
some players shot the ball with two hands, starting as Newton’s laws, that are related to how forces, 



Chapter 8| Biomechanics of Physical Activity 211 

such as air resistance, gravity, and muscle forces age, skill, sex, and other factors. 
are produced and mediated, as well as biomechan- For factory work tasks, the employer’s goals of 
ical principles of how tissues respond to forces high productivity, safety, and minimal production 
applied to them. Here, the players cannot lean too costs may influence what is considered correct 
far back in their sport chairs or the force of grav- technique. Potentially, if workers are paid by the 
ity will tip the chair backward. Sufficient muscle number of tasks completed, then an employee’s 
force is needed to project the ball. Interaction of goal may be to complete the maximum number 
factors may influence the technique—for example, of tasks. In this case, the employee may use tech- 
interactions between the distance between the niques that are the fastest but not necessarily the 
basket (environment) and player, the muscle force safest. In such a case, a responsible employer might 
required to accelerate the ball (law of nature), and use an ergonomist (occupational biomechanist) 
the amount of musculature available to produce to determine what techniques will accomplish 
the force (performer-related). Biomechanists are production goals while maintaining worker safety. 
often most interested in the effects of interaction Even then, however, it is not always possible to 
between mechanical laws of nature and the other determine a single best movement technique, 
anatomical and neuromuscular factors. particularly for tasks that are unusual or involve 

Next, contemplate the notion of a “correct” or awkward work spaces. 
“best technique” in relation to the goals of the task Lastly, for activities of daily living, what tech- 
and the performer. In competitive movements in nique is “correct” for people with movement disor- 
which technique is judged (e.g., dance, gymnas- ders? The goals of a client with weak leg muscles 
tics), movement technique is everything. How- may be to stand up or sit down safely during 
ever, what about other competitive activities? Ask daily life without assistance and without feeling 
yourself and others whether performing a given self-conscious. Such a client will demonstrate a 
movement (e.g., high jump, running, rising from a different pattern of movements than those who 
chair) with the “right” technique is important for have adequate muscle function. However, though 
performance success and why (or why not). How we often assume that the movement techniques 
do we know whether the current technique or a displayed by those without movement disorders 
new one provided by a coach is the right or best set the standard to achieve, they may or may not 
one? Referring back to our basketball players, what be appropriate for a given client. Even so, they may 
is the right technique? Or for the chapter-opening be useful in assessing a client’s movement. 
scenario, how is running technique relevant to Here are the author’s deductions about best 
Aisha’s situation? Now, consider whether there is movement technique. Do you agree? 
a right technique for movements with other pur- 

1. Because how and why we move as we do 
poses, such as work tasks (e.g., lifting objects or 

are influenced by the characteristics of the 
people) and daily activities (e.g., standing, sitting). 

five main categories discussed earlier and 
Also consider characteristics that might affect best 

their interactions: 
technique—for example, the performer charac- 
teristics of age, gender, skill level, and medical >» Most humans display relatively compara- 

condition. ble basic movement techniques for some 

For competitive activities, we often assume that fundamental movements (e.g., running, 

the correct technique is that of the world’s best hopping) due to their similarities in the 

performers. After all, they must be doing it right five main categories (e.g., basic skeletal 

in order to be the best? Not necessarily, given structures, being subject to laws of nature 

they might use only good technique that is sup- such as gravity). 

plemented by outstanding strength, balance, and > Variations of those characteristics between 

other neuromuscular factors. What if a movement individuals also means that the best 
technique works well only for whole-body coor- technique for one person may not be the 

dination from a standing position, not sitting in a best for another. For instance, baseball 

sports chair? Thus, sport biomechanists compare pitchers all throw somewhat differently 

the biomechanics of elite performers to many from each other, due in part to variations 

other kinds of athletes in a variety of settings and in shoulder joint and body structures. 

conditions. They then try to identify biomechanical Certainly, each of our basketball players 

factors in the different conditions that might be must have determined the technique that 

related to high-level performance given unique allows them to use the muscles available 



Me 212 Introduction to Kinesiology 

to generate the force and accuracy needed or roughly the first half of the time period when 

to shoot baskets. her foot is in contact with the ground. First, we 
describe some of the motions and body positioning. 

2. A “successful” movement technique is one 
that, regardless of how the movement is A runner’s foot typically strikes the ground slightly 

in front of the body, and then the person’s body 
performed, enables the performer to accom- 

rotates plish movement goals (i.e., performance over the foot. During the braking phase, the 
runner loses a small amount of speed and forward effectiveness) and health and safety goals 

at the highest level that the person can or momentum; of course, she wants to minimize this 

wants to achieve. loss of momentum. 
Second, because forces affect Aisha’s motion, 

>» Better choices for movement technique 
let’s identify the forces acting on her during this 

are available when the performer takes 
phase (see figure 8.3). There is, of course, the force 

advantage of biomechanical principles 
of gravity on her body weight. We also consider 

that best enable the performer to generate 
whether air resistance and wind forces are acting 

and control forces and movements. Given 
(assume that they are negligible). Next, we search 

Newton’s law of acceleration, for example, 
our biomechanical toolbox for principles to help us 

when shooting a basketball, a player who 
identify forces that could be generated between the 

doesn’t have the use of trunk muscles to 
foot and the ground. According to Newton’s third 

produce force to accelerate the ball suf- 
law (action-reaction), for every force applied by the 

ficiently can create more total force by 
foot to the ground, the ground will apply an equal 

shooting with two hands. 
and opposite-acting force back to the foot. Because 

>» The “best” movement technique may be Aisha’s foot is in front of her body at contact, her 
optimal for achieving some goals but not momentum causes her foot to push forward against 
others. This dilemma can be seen in both the ground (action force); in reaction, the ground 
factory work and sport, where perfor- applies a backward force (ground reaction force, 
mance goals may be achieved at the cost or GRF) to her body, thus opposing her motion 
of safety goals. and slowing her down. Simultaneously, she creates 

another set of action-reaction forces in the vertical 
Each person has a unique set of potentially 

direction by pushing down against the ground; the 
conflicting goals and interactions among charac- 
teristics of the five categories. Therefore, it can be reaction force here is upward. 

difficult for biomechanists to determine appropriate Our third step is to determine the biomechani- 

movement techniques that are common to most cal principles that could help Aisha minimize her 

performers and challenging for professionals. loss of momentum. Here, we want principles that 

Balancing Performance 
Effectiveness and Safety 
Let’s explore how biomechanical principles and 
analysis can help someone to achieve both per- 
formance and tissue safety goals. Specifically, 
we return to Aisha’s scenario from the chapter 
opening. Her performance goal is to win her age 
group during a national 10K running road race; 
her tissue safety goals are to minimize progression Action Reaction 
of her knee OA and remain injury free. Watch for force force 

conflicts between these goals due to force effects 
on running performance and knee joint tissues. 

j Reaction 
1 force 

Performance Effectiveness 

To ensure that Aisha can run at the fastest pace that 
she can maintain, we can look at the biomechan- GEUWSEE] Action-reaction forces between the foot 
ics of her entire body during various intervals of and ground during the braking phase. The ground reac- 
time within a single running cycle. Here, we only tion forces acting on Aisha affect her body’s vertical 
examine one small interval—the braking phase, and horizontal momentum. 



Chapter 8| Biomechanics of Physical Activity 213 

explain how forces affect momentum. We identify or the time spent in the braking phase? If Aisha is 
the principle stating that the amount of momentum placing her foot too far in front of her or landing 
gained or lost by a system depends not only on on her heel instead of on her forefoot, then she is 
the amount of force but also on the length of time likely creating too much backward-directed GRF 
for which the force is applied (a variable called that will act for too long. This is also where we find 
impulse). Therefore, the higher the backward GRF the first potential conflict between performance 
acting on Aisha, and the longer it acts on her, the and tissue safety: If Aisha changed her footstrike 
more momentum she loses. to a forefoot landing in order to shorten the time 

Fourth, we seek to determine how to manipulate acted on it by the GRF, she might also increase the 
the crucial quantities, and this is where we consider loading force on her calf muscles or foot connective 
Aisha’s movement technique. Specifically, how can tissues that could eventually contribute to injury of 
we reduce the amount of backward-directed GRF the foot tissues and knee cartilage or to OA. 

Risk Factors for Knee Osteoarthritis 

Osteoarthritis causation exemplifies how forces can affect tissue structure and health. OA has no 
cure and can become severe, causing excruciating pain and disability, due primarily to continued 
wear of the joint cartilage and development of bone abnormality (National Institute of Arthritis and 
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, 2019) (figure 8.4). 

e | 

tg » 

WBTE ARING 

FIGURE8.4 Radiographs of (a) a healthy knee and (b) an osteoarthritic (OA) knee. The space between 
the OA bones is narrowed because the cartilage (which isn’t visible on a radiograph) is worn down, 
particularly on one side of the knee joint. 

© Kathy J. Simpson 

What might be your highest risk factors? Previous knee joint injury is the predominant factor 

causing young-adult knee OA (Vannini et al., 2016). Your risk of developing OA is up to six times 

higher after having certain knee injuries (Snoeker et al., 2020). Otherwise, obesity is the highest 

risk factor for adults in developed countries (Vina & Kwoh, 2018) because it causes a continuing 

cycle of damage. Specifically, obesity creates abnormal inflammatory processes and high tissue 

loading due to high body weight, which leads to atypical structural changes in bone and weaker, 

damaged cartilage (Silverwood et al., 2015). Another risk factor is the length of time spent during 

one’s life performing high-impact, quick-stop activities, which apply high loads to knee cartilage 

ranging from two to four times body weight during level walking to as much as 20 times body 

weight during landings in certain sports (Vannini et al., PROS 



a 214 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Tissue Health and Safety 
In our ongoing example involving Aisha and her running in training coupled with high tibial forces 

knee, the goals for tissue health and safety are to could result in overuse injuries in the tibia (e.g., 
prevent injury and slow down the OA progression. stress fracture) or connective tissue (e.g., tears), 

Here again, we examine the braking phase of or, for Aisha, progression of knee OA. Conversely, 

running, but our interest now focuses on the bio- progression of OA may be reduced with more 

mechanics of the tibia. We also limit our analysis moderate force loading because it stimulates joint 

here to the vertical direction because it involves the lubrication to reduce joint friction that wears down 
highest bone forces at the knee joint, which could the joint surface (Castrogiovanni et al., 2019). 

damage tissue. First, for simplicity, we identify only Now, we analyze how we might reduce the forces 
some of the vertical forces acting on the tibia. The and the number of times that they are applied to 
downward force that the femur applies to the tib- Aisha’s tissues. In terms of movement technique, 
ia’s articular surface is created, in part, by Aisha’s running more slowly could decrease all of the 
downward momentum when she hits the ground, vertical forces that affect tibial loading, but that is 
which is a function of her mass and the speed at unrealistic in this case because she wants to com- 
which she is moving. The rest of the femur force is pete. Another option would be to strike the ground 
created as a reaction to the tibia being pulled and using the heel rather than the forefoot, which would 
pushed upward against the femur by knee joint create 14 percent less knee-joint force (Rooney & 
muscles and vertical GRF transmitted to the tibia. Derrick, 2013), perhaps due to a reduction in the 

Next, we seek mechanical principles that explain vertical GRF and muscle forces transmitted to the 
how tissue health and safety are compromised. tibia. Here again, we see the conflict between perfor- 

We know that we can help keep bone, connective mance and safety, because a forefoot strike might be 
tissue, and cartilage healthy by applying mechani- better for performance but might also increase the 
cal load (force) in safe amounts over an appropriate risk of stress fracture or OA progression. In terms of 
number of repetitions. However, another principle environmental considerations, Aisha could run on 

holds that high total force combined with too many relatively soft, stable surfaces (rubberized track) to 

repetitions G.e., number of steps) over a long reduce vertical GRF. She should also evaluate her 
period of time can weaken these tissues, which training schedule to ensure that her training volume 
means that less force is required to create perma- is no higher than needed and thus avoid excessive 
nent damage when loaded. Thus, high volumes of repetitions of tibial loading. 

Professional Issues in Kinesiology 

Brawny Bones and Overload 
According to Karlsson and Rosengren (2020), bone fractures during childhood and after middle 
age are a serious problem and are related to poor bone health. Building bone increases bone 
mechanical strength, the critical property of bone health, and it is built during childhood through 
the early adult years. During this period, appropriate mechanical loading is essential to building 
bone strength. Bone is stimulated to become stronger when it experiences an overload, in which 
bone load is greater and applied more rapidly than is typical for the individual. Because muscle 
and ground reaction forces are primary sources for bone loading, bone strength can be improved 
by enhancing muscle strength and performing movements (e.g., running and jumping) that generate 
high forces and are performed rapidly. In contrast, insufficient physical activity reduces mechani- 
cal loading and is related to bone health deficits. Therefore, physical activity is crucial. Karlsson 
and Rosengren found that, compared to one to two days per week, daily school physical activity 
improved bone health significantly and was associated with reduced fracture risk. 

Citation style: APA 
Karlsson, M.K., & Rosengren, B.E. (2020). Exercise and peak bone mass. Current Osteoporosis Reports, 
18(3), 285-290. https://doi-org 10.1007/s11914-020-00588-1. 



Chapter 8 |B iomechanics of Physical Activity 215 

Wrap-Up 
The physical laws of nature shape our movements and prescribed techniques. When we understand 
and our body tissues. Biomechanists and kinesiol- how mechanical principles influence our body 
ogy professionals can apply mechanical principles functioning, movement, and structure, we can apply 
and laws to enhance performance effectiveness; that knowledge to work, leisure activities, sport, 
maintain or increase the health of tissues and pre- exercise, dance, daily tasks, rehabilitation—indeed, 
vent injury; and select or modify assistive devices, to any action involving movement or forces acting 
joint or tissue replacements, equipment, sport rules, on or within the body. 

MORE INFORMATION ON BIOMECHANICS OF PHYSICAL ACTIVITY = 

Organizations 

American Society of Biomechanics 

Gait and Clinical Movement Analysis Society 

International Society of Biomechanics 

International Society of Biomechanics in Sports 

International Society of Electrophysiology and Kinesiology 

International Society for Posture and Gait Research 

Journals 

Applied Bionics and Biomechanics 

Clinical Biomechanics 

Gait & Posture 

Human Movement Science 

International Biomechanics 

International Journal of Experimental and Computational Biomechanics 

Journal of Applied Biomaterials and Biomechanics 

Journal of Applied Biomechanics 

Journal of Biomechanical Engineering 

Journal of Biomechanics 

Journal of Dance Medicine & Science 

Journal of Electromyography and Kinesiology 

Journal of Prosthetics and Orthotics 

Sports Biomechanics 



Wm 216 introduction to Kinesiology 

REVIEW. QUESTIONS ee 
1. What is similar and what is different between the meanings of the terms biomechanics, 

human movement biomechanics, and kinesiology? 

. What is meant by structure and by function? Give two new examples for each term. 

. What are the goals of the study of biomechanics? 

. What are the primary application areas of biomechanics in kinesiology? 

. In what types of settings do biomechanists typically work? 

ao&WNw-aDoW&.  What major instruments are used in biomechanics research? 

is t4 K Propel ») Go to HKPropel to complete the activities for this chapter. 



Physiology of Physical Activity 
Jennifer L. Caputo 

In this chapter, we will 

° cover the key features of the eubdilecipline -opsioleey.ofp hysical : 
activity and the sre oe available to exercise science 
professionals, 

e explain how physiology 0tf s physicala ctivityf itwsi thin the dene o=f - . 
kinesiology, : 2 | Se 

e review the history and development ofp hysloogy aofh ysial activitya3s . : : ae : eS 
a subdiscipline, © - 8 Se 

e identify the research methods usedbyK inesiologists working ine  xercise 
_ physiology, and — See 

e examine how the body responds top hysical activity <an d ho fe 
changes relate to 2a Peto al ce and he Ith 



Does using a standing desk at work improve health? This is the question asked byc ee . 
members in the human resources department of an insurance company. In an effort to decrease — 

the company’s health care costs, the staff are looking into purchasing desks that allow employees 

to stand while reading and reviewing policies during the workday. 
A personal trainer is working with a client who has a 

family history of cardiovascular disease. However, 
the client does not enjoy aerobic exercise, despite 
its well-documented role in reducing cardiovascu- 
lar disease risk. Because the client is unlikely to 
adhere to an aerobic exercise program, the trainer 
researches whether it is possible to reduce the 
client’s risk of a stroke or a heart attack by having 
her follow a special resistance training program 
instead of riding a bike or running. 

Many people now use wearable technology to 
measure the amount and intensity of their physical — 
activity, estimate their caloric expenditure, and 
even monitor their sleep patterns. While shopping 
at a local fitness store, ac ustomer reads the boxes _ 
of several fitness monitors and wonders about the 

accuracy of the measurements and the marketing 
claims. 
AS these scenarios susei peeoe who work in 

: the kines iology subdiscipline |known as physiology 
of physical activity can help people ina variety of 
settings and situations. Exercise physiologists gen- © Human Kinetics 

erate key knowledge ii n kinesiology that can support 
evidence- -based recommendations 

salheiR(aceilan lea0srenhahlSa  
such as those described her 

The questions raised in the chapter-opening sce- breathing rate increase; in addition, your blood 
nario represent some of the areas of specialization pressure increases, and you may begin to sweat. 
available in physiology of physical activity. If you These changes are your body’s way of meeting the 
are curious about how your body and your health increased demands for oxygen, energy, and tem- 
status are altered by either physical activity or a perature regulation. If you were physically active 
lack thereof, then this subdiscipline will be of great across several months, you might notice changes in 
interest to you. With knowledge of this field, you your body weight, and muscle and fat mass. These 
can help athletes achieve peak performance, help physiological responses to physical activity and 
people participate safely in physical activity, con- exercise are just a few of the topics that intrigue 
duct research on preventing and treating disease by students of physiology of physical activity. 
means of physical activity and exercise, and even Often referred to as exercise physiology, this 
help maximize the capacity of people who work in is a subdiscipline of the biophysical sphere, along 
extreme conditions of heat, cold, altitude, under- with biomechanics of physical activity (discussed 
water settings, or even the microgravity of space. in chapter 8). However, whereas biomechanists 

Students of physiology of physical activity seek apply principles of physics and engineering to 
to understand both how the body responds to meet the mechanical causes of physical activity, exer- 
the immediate demands of being physically active cise physiologists apply principles of biology and 
and how it adapts to repeated bouts of exercise. chemistry to understand metabolic energy sources 
For instance, when you chase down a shot on the and their acute and chronic responses to physical 
tennis court or go for a jog, your heart rate and activity. 

a 218 



Chapter 9| Physiology of Physical Activity 219 

Goals of Exercise Physiology 

» To understand how to maximize physical performance 
» To understand how to improve physical function in altered environments, such as those 

characterized by high temperature or high altitude 
» To understand how physical activity and exercise improve health and fitness 
> To understand how exercise can be used in treating and preventing disease and alleviating 

symptoms of disease 

» To understand adaptations in physiology and pathophysiology in response to physical activity 

Why Use Physiology sport physiologists covers a range of topics such 
as fluid and food recommendations before, during, 

of Physical Activity? and after exercise; the role of genetics in exercise 

From chapter 1, we know that exercise is a form of and physical activity performance; the effectiveness 

physical activity that is used to improve or regain of ergogenic aids in improving performance; and 

performance, health, or physical appearance. Exer- methods to maximize recovery for athletes. Sport 

cise physiology primarily focuses on the exercise physiologists also use information and techniques 

components of physical activity, including training, from other disciplines and subdisciplines to study 

detraining, and how participating in physical activ- ways of enhancing performance. For example, they 

ity can improve health and decrease the risk of all- use information gleaned from nutrition research 

cause mortality. The following sections summarize in working with sport dietitians and nutritionists 

some of the benefits derived from understanding to manipulate athletes’ diets to enhance carbohy- 

the subdiscipline of exercise physiology. drate storage or protein metabolism to improve 
performance. 

Sport physiologists are also concerned with the 
Enhancing Sport Performance and Training effects of the environment on sport performance. 
Applying physiological techniques to understand For instance, data from sport physiology studies 
and improve human exercise performance has have been used to develop guidelines to avoid heat 
been a major goal of exercise physiology since its illness in sport and to prevent health problems in 
inception. The principles of physiology of physical scuba divers brought on by prolonged immersion 
activity form the foundation for developing condi- in deep water. In another example, before the 1968 
tioning programs for athletes. This area of exercise Summer Olympics in Mexico City—which sits 7,218 
physiology, often called sport physiology, involves feet (2,200 meters) above sea level—leading exer- 
applying “the concepts of exercise physiology cise physiologists conducted numerous studies on 
to enhancing sport performance and optimally the acute effects of, and acclimatization to, high alti- 
training athletes” (Kenney et al., 2020, p. 3). Think tude. Sport governing bodies used the knowledge 
about a track coach who needs to develop running gained from these studies to better prepare athletes 
programs for sprinters, middle-distance runners, for the Olympics. Often, physiological knowledge 
and distance runners. The variety of speeds and is focused on maximizing performance to increase 

distances covered by these athletes poses special the chance of winning a medal, but it has also 
challenges for the coach, who must optimize the focused on dealing with adverse conditions like 
training program for each group of runners. environmental pollutants at some Olympic venues. 

Some of the earliest studies conducted on 
physiological responses to strenuous exercise and 

training came from the Harvard Fatigue Labora- Improving Physical Fitness 
tory (Dill et al., 1930; Margaria et al., 1933). This 

Studying exercise physiology also helps us under- 
research provided an early understanding of the 

stand the physiological determinants of physical 
responses to exercise that contribute to fatigue and 

fitness and the ways training programs can improve 
how changing altitude and temperature can alter 

fitness. In the 1950s, interest in improving physical 
the physiological response to exercise. Research by 



a 220 Introduction to Kinesiology 

a eee 

Totateramereal :P RP Lene O502 a CO Aa Hee ne NRA ee ere me 

The Harvard Fatigue 
Laboratory conducted 
many studies in the 
early years of research 
on sport performance 
(for more about the lab, 
see the sidebar devoted 
to it later in this chap- 
ter). 

Reprinted from W.L. Kenney, J. 
Wilmore, and D. Costill, Phys- 
iology of Sport and Exercise, 
7th ed. (Champaign, IL: Human 

Kinetics, 2020), 7. 

fitness was sparked by two events in the United (e.g., pregnancy, diabetes). For instance, pediatric 
States—President Dwight D. Eisenhower’s heart exercise physiologists specialize in studying and 
attack and the publication of a study reporting working with children and adolescents, and other 
that American children were less fit than European exercise scientists focus on gerontology (the study 
children (Berryman, 1995). These events, combined of aging). In addition, the influence of heredity on 
with concerns about young men’s poor fitness physical fitness components and trainability has 
for military service, contributed to interest in and attracted considerable research interest among 
development of exercise physiology research on exercise physiologists. Much of this interest has 
components of physical fitness. been stimulated by research on identical twins con- 

Research conducted in exercise physiology and ducted by Claude Bouchard and colleagues (1986). 
other areas of kinesiology over the past 50 years 
has resulted in recommendations for optimal inten- Promoting Health and Treating Disease 
sity, frequency, and duration of training programs 
to develop various components of physical fitness. With Physical Activity 
Just as no distinguishing athletic personality has Exercise physiology serves as a foundation for 
been discovered, early kinesiology researchers understanding how physical activity and exercise 
concluded there is no uniform quality of athletic help reduce the risk of and treat some diseases. 
ability; instead, fitness for physical activities is In 1996, the Surgeon General of the United States 
specific to identifiable components. People who emphasized that “significant health benefits could 
work in fitness centers need to understand this be obtained by including a moderate amount of 
research, as well as findings about how to adapt physical activity on most, if not all, days of the 
fitness programs to make them safe and effective week” (U.S. Department of Health and Human 
for different clients—young and old, sedentary Services [USDHHS], 1996). Many researchers have 
and trained, and those with special conditions examined the benefits of physical activity and phys- 



Chapter 9 |P hysiology of Physical Activity 221 

Strength and Conditioning Specialists 

When working with athletes in the weight room, strength coaches need to understand how to alter 
conditioning programs to meet the needs of athletes from many sport teams. Strength coaches 
learn to manage the amount of weight lifted, the number of repetitions and sets performed, and 
the length of rest periods assigned in different ways to produce appropriate responses in athletes 
as diverse as sprinters, basketball players, softball players, and football players. 

ical fitness in preventing and even reversing coro- under the direction of a physician. Students inter- 
nary heart disease (Lawler et al., 2011; Thompson ested in cardiac rehabilitation will learn the forms 
et al., 2003). Researchers have also documented the of cardiovascular disease, how they are diagnosed, 
role of physical activity in preventing and treating and the appropriate medical and pharmacological 
other diseases, such as osteoporosis (Vuori, 2001) treatments. They also gain knowledge of the cardio- 
and non-insulin-dependent diabetes (Conners et vascular system and its responses to exercise and 
al., 2014). Researchers are now developing exer- how to read an electrocardiogram (ECG), which 
cise tests to screen for obstructive sleep apnea, traces the heart’s electrical activity. Cardiac reha- 
investigating how exercise can help reduce the bilitation specialists know how to modify exercise 
risk of certain cancers (Moore et al., 2016), and programs for people who have high blood pressure, 
examining the role of exercise in decreasing the have had a heart attack (myocardial infarction), or 
risk of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. have had open heart surgery. 

Some exercise physiologists also focus on the big 
picture—how physical fitness or activity is related Understanding Physiological Changes 
to disease in large populations. In these cases, exer- 
cise physiologists might collaborate with specialists From Physical Activity 
in epidemiology and public health in conducting Early work in exercise physiology focused on the 
two types of studies: longitudinal (comparing the ways in which exercise affects the functioning of 
same group of people over a period of time) and organs and body systems. Exercise physiologists 
cross-sectional (comparing different groups of have examined how the cardiovascular, respiratory, 
people at the same time). Here are examples of how muscular, and endocrine systems respond func- 
we can study obesity using these study designs. tionally and adapt structurally to different types of 
Di Pietro et al. (2004) followed 2,501 healthy men physical activity. Recently, researchers have focused 
for 5 years and showed that daily physical activity on the responses of the reproductive, skeletal, and 
was negatively associated with weight gain across immune systems to acute and chronic exercise. 
time. The men who reduced their activity gained One branch of exercise physiology is closely 
weight, while those who increased their activity lost linked to biochemistry—that is, the chemistry of 
weight. In a cross-sectional study example, Chau et living things. Research techniques developed in 
al. (2012) found that Australian workers with a job biochemistry (and physical chemistry) have been 
that required sitting had a higher overweight and used by investigators to examine genetic variants 
obesity risk than workers who stood at their jobs. to training adaptations. In another example, one of 
Both studies provide knowledge for understanding the most important advances in exercise physiology 
how physical activity is associated with long-term resulted from the use of muscle biopsy technique 
health, one describing how body weight changes to sample muscle tissue and examine muscle gly- 
over time relative to physical activity and the other cogen (stored carbohydrate) concentration during 
providing a snapshot of how obesity varies across exercise (Hultman, 1967). Biochemical techniques 

sitting and standing groups. have also been used to develop our understanding 
Physiologists who study the role of physical of lactate production and the use of energy stores 

activity in disease management and rehabilitation during exercise. For individuals with type 2 dia- 

are known as clinical exercise physiologists. Stu- betes, biochemical techniques have provided an 

dents who train in this area become familiar with understanding of how physical activity enhances 

basic concepts in several medical specialties, such insulin sensitivity and improves glycemic control. 

as cardiology and pulmonary medicine, and work In addition, research from molecular biology 



Ml 222 Introduction to Kinesiology 

enhanced our understanding of how cells func- agencies such as the National Institutes of Health 
tion. Exercise physiologists use techniques of and to foundations such as the Robert Wood John- 

molecular biology to study how muscle protein son Foundation. Exercise physiology scholars also 
synthesis is turned on and off by changing levels work in corporate and government laboratories. For 
of muscle activity (Booth, 1989). This molecular example, research funded by the U.S. military and 
knowledge is important for understanding how by the National Aeronautics and Space Administra- 
muscles increase and decrease in size in response tion (NASA) is conducted in university, government, 
to changes in physical activity; it also contributes and medical laboratories. 
to our understanding of how muscles are damaged Graduates who hold bachelor’s or master’s 
and recover from injury. degrees from kinesiology programs may also 

have careers in clinical exercise physiology, often 
with additional training and certifications. These 

What Do Exercise Physiologists Do? individuals provide clinical exercise testing and 

Scholars who study exercise physiology typically prescription in affiliation with medical clinics or 

work as university faculty members, although hospitals to help patients with cardiac and pul- 

employment opportunities also exist in clinics, monary rehabilitation. Kinesiology graduates also 

hospitals, and research centers. Researchers and work as exercise instructors or personal trainers 

professors usually hold a doctoral degree in exer- in commercial and corporate fitness centers or as 

cise physiology. University faculty members teach strength and conditioning coaches. 

courses such as exercise physiology and exercise 
prescription, and they conduct research on topics History of Physiology 
such as the effects of conditioning programs on 
sport performance and the effects of physical of Physical Activity 
activity on reducing the risk of chronic disease. 

The physiology of physical activity evolved from 
Some faculty focus on basic research, using animal 

physiology in the 18th century after Antoine 
models to understand physiology and pathophysi- 

Lavoisier and Pierre de Laplace developed the 
ology. To support their research, faculty members 

methodology to measure oxygen consumption 
often write research grant proposals to federal 

and carbon dioxide production during respiration 

Kinesiology Colleagues . 

Sandy Stevens 
Walking poses a challenge for thousands of people living 
with disability. Some find assistance from Sandy Stevens, a 
faculty member in exercise science in the Health and Human 
Performance Department at Middle Tennessee State Univer- 
sity, who puts her knowledge of kinesiology to work every day 
in helping people once again place one foot in front of the 
other. Dr. Stevens trains people with spinal cord injuries to 
walk using underwater treadmills; over time, her participants 
often develop the strength and skills to begin gait training on 
land. The program, which received financial support from the 

_ National Institutes of Health, draws participants from around 
the world. Dr. Stevens and her kinesiology colleagues apply 
their knowledge of how to train the human body to the unique 

characteristics of an aquatic environment in order to make 
a difference in the lives of people living with disability—one 
step at a time. 



Chapter 9| Physiology of Physical Activity 223 

in animals (USDHHS, 1996). During the following research on physical activity, physical fitness, and 
century, these techniques were further developed chronic disease (Paffenbarger, 1994) that continues 
and applied to studying how humans responded to this day. Morris’ research also inspired additional 
to physical activity and daily tasks, such as lifting studies of the effects of fitness and endurance 
loads. training on risk factors for coronary heart disease, 

including serum cholesterol and blood pressure. 
Early Beginnings Based on the results of many of these studies, 

U.S. government agencies released two official 
Two of the early contributors to our understand- 

statements in the 1990s about the role of physical 
ing of physiology of physical activity were August activity in preventing chronic diseases. The first 
Krogh of the University of Copenhagen and A.V. statement followed the NIH Consensus Devel- 
Hill of University College, London. Krogh devel- 

opment Conference on Physical Activity and 
oped one of the first cycle ergometers (exercise 

Cardiovascular Health held in December 1995. 
bikes), which he used to study physiological 

Among other things, the consensus development 
responses to exercise. He received the Nobel Prize 

panel concluded that “physical inactivity is a 
in Physiology in 1920 for his research on the regu- 

major risk factor for cardiovascular disease” and 
lation of microcirculation (Astrand, 1991), In 1921, 

that “moderate levels of regular physical activity 
Hill received the Nobel Prize for his work on energy 

confer significant health benefits” (NIH Consensus 
metabolism. In a classic paper, Hill and Lupton 

Development Panel, 1996, p. 245; italics added). 
(1923) presented many of the basic concepts of 

The other statement came in the form of the Sur- 
exercise physiology related to oxygen consump- geon General’s first report on physical activity 
tion, lactate production, and oxygen debt (i.e., and health, published by the U.S. Department of 
excess Oxygen consumption following exercise). Health and Human Services in 1996. This report 
In addition to being an outstanding scientist and concluded that regular physical activity can not 
mentor, Hill assisted European minority refugee only reduce the risk of heart disease but can also 
scientists who were fleeing the Nazis during the reduce the risk of diabetes, hypertension (high 
1930s and 1940s (Rall, 2017). blood pressure), and colon cancer and can help 

Our early understanding of exercise physiology control body weight (USDHHS, 1996). 
was also shaped by research conducted at the 
Karpovich and Cureton laboratories established in 
physical education departments. In 1927, Dr. Peter Recent Events 
V. Karpovich established an exercise physiology Recently, physiology researchers have continued to 
laboratory at Springfield College in Massachusetts highlight the impact of physical activity and exer- 
(Kroll, 1982). Karpovich became well known for cise not only in mitigating degenerative diseases 
his research on the effects of ergogenic aids on such as osteoporosis, cardiovascular disease, and 
physical performance and served as one of the diabetes but in prolonging life. The vigorous, aero- 
founders of the American College of Sports Med- bic training program of elite athletes was identified 
icine (ACSM). The second laboratory, established as leading to lower mortality and greater longevity 
in 1944 by Thomas K. Cureton, Jr., was located when compared to the general population (Ter- 
at the University of Illinois. Dr. Cureton and his amoto & Bungum, 2010). The Human Genome 
laboratory became well known for research on Project completed in 2003 provided an opportunity 
physical fitness, and many leading investigators to study whether physical activity could prevent 
of the physiology of exercise were trained there. diseases or be used to treat them by influencing 

the expression of genes. Researchers explored the 

Significant Events, 1950 to 2000 existence of fitness phenotypes and how genes 
influence muscular and cardiovascular adaptations 

One of the most important events that stimulated to physical activity and exercise (Bray et al., 2009). 
research in physiology of physical activity after Strides in understanding muscle metabolism and 
1950 occurred in England. In 1953, Jeremy Morris AMPK, the enzyme that regulates glucose and fat 
and colleagues published a study on coronary heart uptake, have led to better interventions for obesity 
disease and physical activity in which they found and type 2 diabetes (Winder & Tomson, 2007). 
that drivers of double-decker buses in London Greater focus has also been placed on the benefits 
had a significantly higher disease risk than did the and efficacy of low-volume, high-intensity interval 
conductors on those buses (Morris et al., 1953). training (HIIT). This method of training incorpo- 
This study stimulated interest in epidemiological 



a 224 Introduction to Kinesiology 

rates short, alternating periods of high-intensity control factors that can affect responses to exercise, 

activity and rest periods and has been shown to such as variations in temperature and humidity. 

improve maximal oxygen consumption, insulin sen- Researchers are encouraged to use standard pro- 

sitivity, and endothelial function (Kilpatrick et al., tocols and techniques so that work conducted in 
2014). Research also has focused on the benefits of different laboratories can be compared. 

lower-intensity activity on longevity. Older women Many techniques are available for assessing the 
taking as few as 4,400 steps per day had a lower health-related components of fitness and the traits 
risk of mortality over a 4.3-year period than those associated with a lower risk of hypokinetic disease. 
taking 2,700 steps per day. Regardless of stepping For example, cardiovascular fitness can be assessed 
intensity, the all-cause mortality risk continued to either by direct measurement or by estimating 
decrease until the number of daily steps reached oxygen consumption, which requires measuring 

7,500 (Lee et al., 2019). the volume of oxygen and carbon dioxide in 
The use of devices for measuring step count, as expired (exhaled) air. Early investigators collected 

well as tracking heart rate and distance covered, expired air in Douglas bags and analyzed the gas 
has been a top fitness trend identified by the concentrations using chemical analyzers. They then 
American College of Sports Medicine since 2016. used a spirometer or volume meter to measure 
Wearable technology includes smart watches, heart how much gas was in the bag. Today, investigators 
rate monitors, and GPS (global positioning system) measure gas concentrations with electronic ana- 
devices and is estimated to be a $95 billion indus- lyzers and gas volumes with flow meters. When 
try (Thompson, 2019). In addition to movement, interfaced with computers, these devices provide 
these devices can monitor sitting or sedentary nearly instantaneous and continuous information 
time. This is important because evidence from about oxygen uptake as people rest or exercise. 
“inactivity physiology” has uncovered negative By measuring oxygen uptake, researchers can 
cardiovascular and metabolic outcomes of being obtain information about how the muscles use 
sedentary (Hamilton et al., 2008). Having people oxygen and how much energy is expended during 
sit less throughout the day is now a key guideline physical activity. The most widely accepted method 
in the Physical Activity Guidelines for adults (U.S. of measuring cardiovascular fitness is to determine 
Department of Health and Human Services, 2018). maximal oxygen uptake, or VO max. This can 

be done by having a person exercise while the 
intensity is increased progressively (i.e., using a 

BRE EE UIN ©eee ee ee graded exercise test) until the person can no longer 
Based on exercise physiology and other research, the maintain the required exercise intensity. Physiolo- 

National Institutes of Health and the U.S. Surgeon gists also use submaximal exercise tests to estimate 

General concluded that moderate physical activity is cardiovascular fitness. These tests do not require 

beneficial in reducing the risk of chronic diseases (e.g., subjects to exercise at maximal level; instead, pre- 
diction equations using heart rate responses to 

heart disease, diabetes, hypertension, and colon cancer) 
submaximal exercise are used to estimate maximal 

resulting from inactivity and sedentary behavior. 
oxygen uptake. 

Ergometers are used during exercise tests to 
measure the external work performed by mus- 

Research Methods for Physiology cles. Common ergometers used in exercise sci- 

of Physical Activity ence include motorized treadmills and leg and 
arm cycles. These devices enable physiologists to 

Kinesiologists working in the subdiscipline of monitor factors such as heart rate, blood pressure, 
exercise physiology use many methods to measure breathing rate, oxygen consumption, and carbon 
and determine how the human body responds and 

dioxide production while a person is active. Phys- 
adapts to physical activity. This work is conducted 

iologists may also draw blood samples to monitor 
both within and outside of the laboratory. changes in lactic acid and glucose. 

Because body weight is supported during 
Laboratory Work cycling, cycle ergometers are useful for compar- 

Much of the equipment used to monitor and eval- ing people of different body weights. Leg cycle 

uate physiological responses is in exercise physi- ergometers also enable researchers to more easily 

ology laboratories. Working in a laboratory space measure blood pressure and obtain blood samples 

is beneficial because it provides the opportunity to during exercise because the arms are stationary. 



Chapter 9| Physiology of Physical Activity 225 

Harvard Fatigue Laboratory 

The Harvard Fatigue Laboratory, founded in 1927, was the brainchild of L.J. Henderson, a phys- 
ical chemist. Directed by David Bruce Dill, the laboratory included a room containing a treadmill 
borrowed from the Carnegie Nutrition Laboratory, as well as a large gasometer, a room for basal 
metabolism studies, an animal room, and a climatic room (Dill, 1967). Research undertaken in lab- 
oratory included environmental studies conducted at high altitude, in the desert, and in steel mills. 

Although the laboratory existed only until 1946, it profoundly affected research on exercise 
physiology in the United States and Europe during the second half of the 20th century. Many 
young investigators received their formative training at the laboratory as postdoctoral or doctoral 
students, including Ancel Keys, R.E. Johnson, Sid Robinson, and Steve Horvath. The many inter- 
national scientists who spent time at the laboratory included Lucien Brouha of Belgium; Rodolfo 
Margaria of Italy; and E.H. Christensen, Erling Asmussen, and Marius Nielsen of Denmark (Dill, 
1967). All these investigators went on to establish their own laboratories and were responsible for 
training many of the leading investigators in physiology of physical activity in the following decades. 

Some disadvantages of the cycle ergometer are that 
oxygen uptake is generally lower and local fatigue 
occurs earlier because the rider uses only the leg 
muscles. Motorized treadmills allow people to be 
tested while they walk or run at different speeds; 
in addition, the slope (grade) of the treadmill can 
be increased to increase exercise intensity at a 
constant speed. 

For studies of moderate to vigorous exercise, 
treadmills are preferable to cycle ergometers 
because running is more strenuous than cycling 
for most people. When using treadmills, however, 
researchers must account for body weight dif- 
ferences. When walking or running at the same 
speed and grade, heavier people work harder than 
lighter people do because these activities require 
performers to lift their body weight with every step. 
Treadmills also make it more difficult to measure 
blood pressure and sample blood, especially when 
the performer is running, because the arms are 
moving. To study upper body exercise, exercise 
physiologists can use arm ergometers. The swim- 
ming flume, developed in Sweden, has been used 
to study physiological responses to swimming, and 
rowing ergometers are useful in studying rowers. 

Another measure commonly assessed by kine- 
siologists is body composition. This assessment is 
used to determine a person’s percentage of body 
fat or ratio of lean tissue to adipose tissue. The tra- 
ditional gold standard for determining body com- 
position in humans involves hydrostatic weighing, 

also known as underwater weighing, in which, as 
the name indicates, the person is weighed while Blood pressure is easily monitored as a person rides a leg 

submerged in water. This technique makes use of cycle ergometer. 

Archimedes’ principle, which states that the buoy- © Jennifer L. Caputo 

ant force acting on a submerged object is equal to 



MM 226 introduction to Kinesiology 

in the biopsy samples. Examination of muscle tissue 

samples under a microscope helps determine struc- 

tural changes following different types of training, 
as well as structural damage after exercise. 

Animal Models 
The effects of physical activity on some organs 
cannot be studied easily in humans; examples 
include the brain, heart, and liver. In some instances, 
researchers use animals, such as rats, to examine 
both the functional and the structural changes that 
occur in response to single and repeated bouts of 
exercise on animal treadmills and running wheels. 
One of the major advantages of using animals in 
physiological research is that both the animals and 

Body fat can be assessed using skinfold measurements. the environment can be more carefully controlled 
© Jennifer L. Caputo than when working with human volunteers. The 

use of animals with genetic abnormalities has also 
proven helpful for examining the effects of exercise 

the weight of the water displaced (density = mass + on certain clinical disorders, such as obesity and 

volume). Once body density has been determined, hypertension. In another advantage, some exper- 

equations are used to estimate the percentage of imental techniques that are not approved for use 

body fat. The BOD POD is an alternative method with humans can be used to study physiological 

that uses air displacement instead of water dis- responses in animals—for example, the injection of 

placement. Other techniques for estimating body radioactive isotopes of iron to study changes that 

density include measuring total body water using occur in tissue iron stores with training. 

isotopes (e.g., deuterium), measuring the thickness On the other hand, animal research is criticized 

of subcutaneous fat with skinfold calipers, deter- for the fact that not all physiological and chemical 

mining tissue impedance through bioelectrical mechanisms observed in animal species are iden- 

impedance analysis (BIA), and measuring body tical to those observed in humans. This assertion 

fat with dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA). does carry some truth. For example, growth hor- 
mone produced in humans is not identical to that 

Biochemical Methods of any other species. In addition, tissue changes 

Exercise physiologists use biochemical methods to due to training may also differ between species. 

examine changes at the tissue and cellular levels Therefore, investigators must be careful to select 

during and after physical activity. These more the animal, usually a mammal, that most closely 

invasive techniques include blood sampling and reflects the human responses to physical activity 

muscle biopsy. Blood samples are obtained from in which they are interested. 

either venipuncture of superficial arm veins or 
finger pricks. Monitoring changes in the concen- 
tration of blood constituents can help physiologists _KEY POIN, — = eee eee 
determine the utilization of substrate (stored carbo- Over the past century, research conducted inside and 
hydrate and fat), acid-base balance, dehydration, outside the laboratory, using both humans and animals, 
immune function, and endocrine responses. One has advanced knowledge of exercise physiology. 
commonly used biochemical technique in exercise 
physiology is to measure lactate from a blood 
sample taken with a finger prick during exercise 

Field Work 
as an indicator of the use of anaerobic (without 
oxygen) energy-producing systems. Physiologists Whether working with individuals or conducting 
can also use muscle biopsies obtained before and research, exercise physiologists often go beyond 
after exercise to examine changes in muscle gly- the laboratory. There is always a trade-off between 
cogen (stored carbohydrate), lactate production, good experimental control in lab-based research 
and enzyme activity; the chemical methods used to and the ecological validity of field-based research. 
analyze tissues help determine muscle fiber types For example, the easily obtained field measure of 



Chapter 9| Physiology of Physical Activity 

body mass index (BMI) is a good screening tool These instruments have become increasingly pop- 
for risk of obesity-related diseases but is not a ular due to their low cost, small size, and ease of 
measure of body composition. Working in the field use. Whereas pedometers generally measure only 
can present difficulties with monitoring physio- step count, accelerometers can detect the intensity 
logical responses, controlling exercise intensity, of movement using an acceleration-versus-time 
and controlling environmental conditions. Field curve. Some pedometers and accelerometers have 
research also requires portable instruments and memory capacity, which allows for monitoring 
recording equipment. Benefits of field research of weekly activity and progress toward caloric 
include being able to work with larger groups, to expenditure goals. Many such monitors are now 
recruit participants who may not be able to travel commercially available and are used by people to 
to you, and to study physical activity interventions monitor their own physical activity. 
in specific environments. 

Kinesiologists often conduct research studies in 
schools. While it is not practical to bring a treadmill Overview of Knowledge in Physiology 
and a cycle ergometer to a school, other measures of Physical Activity 
of cardiovascular fitness exist. For example, we can 
determine how quickly students can run or walk a Over the past century, exercise physiologists have 

mile marked off on the school field and then use conducted extensive studies of responses to single 

their completion times to estimate maximal oxygen and repeated bouts of physical activity. Much of this 

consumption. Another example is the PACER research has centered on three body systems: mus- 

(Progressive Aerobic Cardiovascular Endurance cular, cardiovascular, and respiratory. Physiologists 

Run), a multistage fitness test adapted from the have also examined the influence of environmental 

20-meter shuttle run, which can be performed in factors such as temperature, diet, and altitude on 

school gymnasiums. In addition to accommodating physiological responses and performance. In this 

multiple students at once, these tests require little overview, we examine how physiological systems 

equipment and offer flexibility when the amount of respond and adapt to physical activity; review 

space available differs from one place to another. factors that influence physiological responses; and 

Alternative means also exist for measuring other then consider the relationships between fitness, 

physiological responses while working in the field. activity, and health. As a student in exercise phys- 

For instance, whereas heart rate can be monitored iology classes, you will likely experience hands-on 

in the laboratory with an ECG machine, it can also opportunities to assess health and fitness and then 

be tracked outside of the laboratory with a low- learn to apply this information to help improve 

cost, battery-operated heart rate monitor. Some the health and performance of apparently healthy 

heart rate monitors allow information to be col- people. Some students take additional exercise 

lected over several days and then downloaded to a physiology classes to learn more about exercise 

computer or uploaded to a wireless network. These with persons with a wide variety of medical con- 

monitors are also useful in assessing and providing ditions. 

information about exercise intensity in the field. 
Physical activity can also be monitored in the Skeletal Muscles 

field by means of motion sensors, which provide an Movement is produced by the contraction of skel- 
alternative to potentially unreliable self-report mea- etal muscles. Each muscle is composed of many 
sures. For instance, pedometers and accelerometers muscle cells, which are called muscle fibers. Inside 
(worn at the hip, ankle, or arm) can be used to mea- a muscle cell, many myofibrils run the length of 
sure the quantity or intensity (or both) of physical the fiber. These myofibrils contain the contrac- 
activity and even to estimate caloric expenditure. 

Improving Sport Performance or Fitness 

What aspect of your sport performance or physical fitness would you like to improve? If you were 

to begin a training program to improve this aspect, which tool would you use to measure physio- 

logical changes related to your performance or your fitness level before and after training? Why 

would this tool be helpful in measuring the changes from your training? 



ME 228 Introduction to Kinesiology 

tile elements that shorten to generate force and lift a free weight, such as a barbell. An isokinetic 

move your bones during physical activity. Human dynamometer, such as a Biodex, can measure 

skeletal muscles contain three primary types of joint torque throughout the range of motion for 

muscle fibers. angular velocities of joint rotation between 500 
(concentric) degrees and —300 (eccentric) degrees 

Muscle Fiber Types per second. 

Did you ever wonder why some people can run Regardless of the type of exercise used in 

fast for short distances, such as the straightaway resistance training, the exerciser must overload 

on a track, whereas other people are much better the muscle group to increase muscular strength, 

at running marathons? People in these two groups power, or endurance. This is the training principle 

likely have different distributions of fiber types in of progressive overload, which indicates stress must 

their leg muscles. Muscle fiber types are classified be gradually increased on a physiological system 

according to the speed at which they contract: fast- or tissue for improvements to occur. Likewise, 

twitch (FT) or slow-twitch (ST). Fast-twitch fibers when you stop overloading the system, the training 

are further subdivided according to how energy adaptations are lost. This is the training principle 

is generated. Fast-twitch fibers that use almost of reversibility. 
exclusively anaerobic energy systems are called 
fast glycolytic (FG) fibers, whereas fast-twitch fibers 
that use both aerobic (with oxygen) and anaerobic MEY POUT ee ce 
(also called glycolytic) energy systems are called Increases in muscular strength, power, and endurance 
fast oxidative glycolytic (FOG) fibers. Slow-twitch result from progressive overload in resistance training. 
fibers primarily use aerobic energy systems. 

During light- to moderate-intensity exercise, 
such as walking to class or jogging, slow-twitch Training is also subject to the principle of spec- 

fibers are recruited first. Because these fibers ificity. This principle holds that if you want to use 

fatigue slowly, light to moderate physical activ- resistance training to improve your performance in 

ity can be sustained for prolonged periods. As a given sport, then you must select exercises that 

the intensity of activity increases, FOG fibers are match, as closely as possible, the techniques and 

recruited next, and the FG fibers are recruited at energy systems used in the chosen sport. Strength 

the highest intensities (e.g., for an all-out sprint). gains will be greatest across the range of move- 

Although the FG fibers produce much greater force ment and velocity of the resistance exercises used 
and power, they fatigue rapidly. Thus, we can sus- (Morrissey et al., 1995). In some physical activities, 
tain the highest intensities of physical activity for the ability to develop force rapidly is critical to 
only a short time—less than a minute. performance. For example, a volleyball player must 

rapidly extend his or her legs in jumping to block 
Resistance Training a spike at the net. If your sport requires you to 

Muscular strength is the maximal amount of force move at high speed, then higher-velocity isokinetic 

exerted by a muscle or group of muscles. Muscu- or isotonic training will be more beneficial than 

lar power, in contrast, is the product of the force low-velocity or isometric training. 

and the velocity of shortening or lengthening. A Increases in muscular strength generally result 

muscle’s ability to exert force repeatedly over a pro- from two factors: neural adaptations and changes 

longed period is known as muscular endurance. in muscle size. Neural adaptations may include 

Resistance or weight training programs designed recruitment of additional muscle fibers (motor 
to improve muscular strength may use exercises units), better synchronization of muscle fiber con- 

that are isometric (producing tension without traction, and reduction in neural inhibition. Neural 

changing overall muscle length), isotonic (pro- adaptations are prominent in the early stages of 

ducing changes in muscle length without changing weight training programs. Secondly, individual 
external gravitational resistance), or isokinetic muscle fibers increase in size following resistance 
(producing changes in muscle length with joint training (hypertrophy). Although evidence from 
movement at a constant angular velocity). Iso- studies of resistance training in cats suggests that 
metric contraction occurs, for example, if you put muscle fibers split and increase (hyperplasia; 
the palms of your hands against a wall and push Gonyea, 1980), researchers have not observed 
as hard as you can or if you do a plank. Isotonic increased numbers of fibers in other animal species 
contraction, on the other hand, occurs when you (Gollnick et al., 1981; Timson et al., 1985). 



Chapter 9 |P hysiology of Physical Activity 229 | 

if sega = 

Isokinetic machines are often used in research, clinical testing, and rehabilitation to measure muscular strength. 

Photo courtesy of Middle Tennessee State University. 

Physical Activities and Resistance Training 

The type of overload that you place on your muscles must match the requirements of the physical 
activity for which you are training. Think about the physical activities in which you participate most 
often. Which activities require muscular strength, and which require muscular endurance? Do you 
need to maintain low-intensity contractions for an extended time, or do you need to rapidly produce 
force for a short duration? Given the speed and duration of the movements required, what type 
of resistance training would be most beneficial in improving your performance in this activity? 

Cardiovascular System 
Transporting oxygen throughout the body is a pri- physical activity by increasing the volume of blood 
mary function of the cardiovascular system, which pumped and the distribution of blood flow to the 
is composed of the heart and blood vessels. To active muscles. In addition, chronic physical activity 
increase the supply of oxygen to skeletal muscles, results in several important physiological adaptations 
the cardiovascular system responds immediately to in cardiac function that improve exercise endurance. 



ME 230 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Cardiac Output Blood Flow Distribution 

Cardiac output, defined as the amount of blood When you are at rest, most of your blood flow 

pumped out of the heart each minute, is a function (cardiac output) goes to your brain and internal 

of both heart rate (number of beats per minute) organs (e.g., liver, kidneys); only 15 percent goes to 

and stroke volume (amount of blood pumped per your skeletal muscles. When you become physically 

beat). Resting cardiac output is remarkably constant active, your muscles need more blood to receive 

in adult humans at about 5 liters (or quarts) per oxygen and nutrients and to remove waste products. 
minute. During physical activity, cardiac output At the onset of activity, your blood vessels constrict 
increases as the muscles use more oxygen. Oxygen (vasoconstrict) in regions of your body that need 
uptake (written as VO,), or the amount of oxygen less blood flow and dilate (vasodilate) in your active 
used by muscle tissues, increases in direct pro- skeletal muscles and heart. This shift in distribution 
portion to the intensity of exercise until maximal moves blood away from your kidneys and digestive 
oxygen uptake (VO,max) is reached. organs to allow two-thirds of your blood to flow to 

As cardiac output increases, more oxygen is your skeletal muscles during heavy exercise. 
delivered to the active muscles. At lower exercise 
intensities, this increase in cardiac output results Cardiovascular Adaptations to Training 
from increases in both heart rate and stroke Your ability to exercise at moderate to heavy inten- 
volume. As your exercise intensity increases above sities for prolonged periods is referred to as your 
40 percent of VO,max, your stroke volume plateaus aerobic or cardiovascular endurance. You have 
because you have reached the limit of how much learned that one of the best indicators of aerobic 
blood your heart can pump per beat. Your heart endurance is your VO,max. You can increase your 
rate, however, continues to increase along with maximal oxygen uptake through endurance train- 
oxygen uptake until you achieve your maximal ing. Much of the improvement in your VO,max 
heart rate (see figure 9.1). At this point, you have results from an increase in stroke volume as the 
also reached your limit for oxygen uptake. Thus, cardiac muscle of your heart increases in size and 
the capacity of the heart to pump blood—the contracts more forcefully in response to endurance 
maximal cardiac output—appears to be one of the training. As a result of training, you have increased 
primary factors limiting maximal oxygen uptake stroke volume both at rest and during exercise, and 
and maximal exercise intensity. Because VO,max your heart rate decreases. In other words, you can 
and maximal heart rate are reached simultaneously, pump more blood with less work! 
fitness instructors can use submaximal exercise Of course, you will want to know whether your 
tests to estimate VO,max. This method is useful in training regimen was successful (see figure 9.2). 
exercise testing and prescription because it does To this end, exercise testing should be conducted 
not require the client to exercise to fatigue. before and after an endurance training program. 

This approach establishes your baseline fitness 
180 level and allows you to determine the effectiveness 

of the training program. One way to check the 
160 efficacy of your training program is to conduct a 

graded exercise test, in which the intensity increases 
140 progressively. At each stage of the test, you should 

notice that your heart rate is lower than it was at that 
120 same stage before you started the training program. 

Your endurance training regimen will also 
100 increase the number of capillaries in your cardiac 

H(raebtaperm t) and skeletal muscles. This results in increased blood 
80 flow and oxygen delivery to the active muscles. The 

increased density of capillaries also slows the blood 
60 moving past the muscles, allowing greater time for 

oxygen to be extracted from the blood. 
Despite your best efforts at fitness training, you 

0 3) 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 
may find that others remain far ahead of you in gains, 

VO, (ml - kg"! - min") including some who seem to do so with less effort 
GITTSERY Relationship between heart rate and VO, and training. This point brings us to a discussion of 
during a graded exercise test. other factors that affect maximal oxygen uptake. One 



Chapter 9 |P hysiology of Physical Activity 231 

200 does that oxygen come from? The respiratory system 
regulates the exchange of gases, including oxygen, 

As between the external environment (air) and the 
internal environment (inside the body). For this 
exchange to occur, air must move from the nasal 

150 
cavity or mouth through the respiratory passages 
to the alveoli in the lungs. After the fresh air enters 

125 the alveoli, oxygen can diffuse into the blood in the 
pulmonary capillaries, and carbon dioxide can leave 

(Hrabetpaerm t) the blood and enter the lungs for exhalation into the 
100 

environment. The process of moving air in and out 
of the lungs is known as ventilation. The amount 

TAS) of air exhaled per minute is known as the minute 
volume (VO); it is the product of the amount of air 
exhaled per breath (tidal volume) and the number 

20 25 30 35 40 of breaths per minute (breathing rate). The minute 

VO> (ml. kg-! - min7!) volume of a person at rest is approximately 6 liters 
(6.3 quarts) per minute. 

GETS} =Comparison of the heart rate responses 
of trained and untrained people during a graded exer- 
cise test. RrE POU ee ae eee 

During high-intensity exercise, an increasing volume of 
is genetics. Studies of the VO,max of identical and air is moved in and out of the lungs, first by breathing 
fraternal twins have shown greater variation between deeper and then by breathing faster. 
fraternal twin pairs than between identical twin pairs 
(Bouchard et al., 1986). In other words, individuals 
with identical genes (e.g., identical twins) are more At the beginning of physical activity, you may 

alike in VO,max, thus indicating a strong genetic notice that your breathing rate increases rapidly 

contribution to maximal aerobic capacity. during the first minute until it reaches a plateau. 

Another factor that influences VO,max is age. Researchers believe that the stimulus to increase 

Maximal oxygen uptake begins to decrease after ventilation comes from sensory receptors in the 

age 30 because of a decrease in maximal heart moving limbs (e.g., muscle spindles, joint recep- 

rate and therefore in maximal cardiac output. The tors) as well as the motor cortex (i.e., the part of 

decline in VO,max with aging may also result in the brain that stimulates muscles to contract). At 

part from a decrease in physical activity. Research- low exercise intensities, the increase in minute 

ers have observed that athletes who maintain their volume results primarily from an increase in the 

training levels experience a slower decline in amount of air moved with each breath; the number 

VO,max (Hagberg, 1987). of breaths remains constant. At higher exercise 
intensities, however, increases occur in both tidal 
volume and respiratory frequency; in other words, 

Respiratory System 
you take bigger and more frequent breaths. 

As you now know, the cardiovascular system trans- While your breathing increases steadily at first, 
ports oxygen to skeletal muscles. However, where it will increase more rapidly at higher intensities 

Determining Your Resting Heart Rate 

The average resting heart rate for adults ranges from 60 to 100 beats per minute, though it can be 

as low as 4O beats per minute in well-trained endurance athletes. You can determine your resting 

heart rate by counting your pulse for 15 seconds and multiplying the result by 4. The best time 

to assess your resting heart rate is when you first wake up in the morning. Based on the amount 

and types of physical activities in which you participate daily, what might explain why your resting 
heart rate is above or below average? 



MG 232 Introduction to Kinesiology 

(see figure 9.3). The point at which your breathing Have you ever wondered why you sweat more 
begins to increase rapidly is known as the ventila- profusely during physical activity in warm environ- 

tory threshold, which occurs at exercise intensities ments? When air temperature approaches or exceeds 
between 50 percent and 75 percent of VO, max. After skin temperature, the body’s cooling mechanism of 
you have been training for a while, your maximal bringing warm blood to the surface is less effective. 
ventilation—the amount of air entering and leaving In this case, the major avenue of heat loss becomes 
your lungs—increases, and your ventilatory thresh- the evaporation of sweat; however, even this method 

old occurs at a higher exercise intensity. is limited in hot, humid environments. This results 
in a higher body temperature and increased risk of 

Variation in Temperature and the heat illness (e.g., heat exhaustion, heatstroke). We 
tolerate physical activity in cool environments better 

Response to Physical Activity because our bodies lose heat from blood close to 
In addition to studying the three primary body sys- the skin as well as from the evaporation of sweat. 
tems affected by physical activity, exercise physiol- In cold water, however, heat loss from the skin 
ogists have studied the influence of environmental increases dramatically because water is an excel- 
factors on our experience of sport and exercise. One lent conductor of heat. Submersion in cold water 
such factor is temperature variation. Our bodies stimulates shivering and an increase in metabolic 
have complex and effective ways of dealing with rate (the rate at which the body uses energy). 
temperature changes in the outside environment. Swimming in cold water also elevates the metabolic 
Humans can regulate their internal (core) tempera- rate, which may lead to an earlier onset of fatigue. 
ture so that it remains relatively constant over a wide Similarly, people whose clothing becomes wet 
range of environmental temperatures (Haymes & during physical activity in cold environments lose 
Wells, 1986). When you begin to exercise, skeletal heat more rapidly, begin to shiver, and are at risk 
muscle contractions produce heat and cause body of hypothermia (below-normal body temperature). 
temperature to rise. The main mechanism for losing 
heat during exercise is the evaporation of sweat from 
the skin surface. In comfortable ambient tempera- ReEY PON ee 
tures, your body core temperature reaches a plateau To cool the body during exercise, blood is distributed to 
in 20 to 30 minutes (see figure 9.4). The higher the the skin as the skin blood vessels dilate and sweating 
intensity of your physical activity, the higher your 

increases. 
core temperature will be when it reaches a plateau. 

38.0 

37.5 

37.0 

36.5 
V(eLn/tmilna)t ion 

R(t°eCcm)tp aelr ature 

36.0 

0 0.5 1.0 1.5 200025 
VO» (L/min) Time (min) 

GEMS Relationship of ventilation to VO, as exer- GEMERI Increases in body core (rectal) temperature 
cise intensity increases progressively during a graded during exercise in comfortable ambient temperatures (77 
exercise test. degrees Fahrenheit, or 25 degrees Celsius) and warm 

ones (95 degrees Fahrenheit, or 35 degrees Celsius). 



Chapter 9| Physiology of Physical Activity 233 

Nutritional Intake and Physical Activity Carbohydrate 
Exercise physiologists study nutritional intake Carbohydrate is stored as glycogen primarily in 
because our responses to training and performance skeletal muscles and the liver. During high-intensity 
are influenced by biochemical energy sources. As a physical activities, muscle glycogen stores serve as 
result, interdisciplinary research that blends exer- the body’s primary source of energy. Normal muscle 
cise physiology with dietetics improves personal glycogen stores are depleted in about 90 minutes 

health and supports high-level sport performance. of continuous exercise at 75 percent of VO,max. 

The three main energy nutrients in foods are The amount of glycogen stored is directly related 

carbohydrate, fat, and protein. Although most of to the carbohydrate content of one’s diet. Coaches 

us have enough stored fat to sustain low-intensity and athletes know that muscle glycogen storage 

activities for many days, we need a shorter-term is increased by a diet that is high in carbohydrate 

energy source—carbohydrate—for higher-intensity (70 percent or more of the calories) consumed for 
endurance activities. Because the amount of car- 2 or 3 days. Considering this fact, some endurance 

bohydrate stored in the body is less than 1 pound athletes use a technique known as carbohydrate 

(0.45 kilogram), daily carbohydrate intake is crucial loading before competition. Carbohydrate loading 

to athletic performance. Although most athletes do is most effective for activities that last more than 

not need to change their daily consumption of pro- 2 hours (e.g., marathons); it offers no apparent 

tein, there are higher recommendations for grams advantage in activities that last less than 1 hour. 

of protein per kilogram of body mass (American Maintaining carbohydrate levels during pro- 

College of Sports Medicine, 2004) for those who longed exercise is important because low blood 

are highly active. The recommendations for dietary glucose is associated with fatigue. Consumption 

fat intake do not differ between physically active of carbohydrate drinks containing 6 to 8 percent 

people and the general population. The following carbohydrate by weight during prolonged exercise 

sections highlight the roles of carbohydrate and has been shown to improve performance and delay 

protein, as well as those of two other nutrients— the onset of fatigue (Coggan & Coyle, 1991). Drinks 

water and iron. containing a higher concentration of carbohydrate 

Energy drinks and gels are an easy way to ingest carbohydrate during intense, prolonged (over 1 hour) physical activity. 

Thomas Barwick/ DigitalVision/Getty Images 



a 234 Introduction to Kinesiology 

(more than 10 percent by weight), however, delay Fluid Intake 
gastric emptying and can lead to gastric distress Water makes up 55 to 60 percent of the human body. 
(Clayton et al., 2014). Glycogen stores can also be During physical activity, you lose some of this water 
depleted by intermittent physical activity and sport through sweating. When you exercise on a warm 
participation. Soccer players often deplete their day, even just walking to class, you will notice that 
muscle glycogen stores during the second half of you sweat even more. To compensate for the fluid 
a game. Saltin (1973) showed that players with lost through sweat, fluid replacement is important. 
depleted glycogen stores covered less distance and Sweat loss decreases body fluids both within and 
spent less time running after half time. Generally, if between cells; it also decreases plasma volume 
a vigorous activity or exercise session lasts longer (the fluid portion of blood). When plasma volume 
than 60 minutes, a sports drink is recommended decreases, less blood returns to the heart, which 
to supply carbohydrates for energy (and minerals reduces the amount of blood pumped with each 
to maintain electrolyte levels) to help sustain per- heartbeat (stroke volume). To compensate for the 
formance. reduced stroke volume, heart rate increases. If fluid 

In addition, athletes with low carbohydrate losses are not replaced, sweat rate decreases, which 
intake (less than 50 percent of total calories) may causes an increase in body temperature. This increase 
progressively deplete their glycogen stores through puts one at greater risk of developing a heat illness, 
daily training. To maintain adequate glycogen especially heat exhaustion. Also, as plasma volume 
stores, physically active individuals should con- is lost, the blood becomes more viscous (thicker), 
sume a diet in which carbohydrate accounts for which requires the heart to contract with greater 
55 to 60 percent of total calories. It is also helpful force to move the blood through the blood vessels. 
to eat foods high in carbohydrate immediately This change leads to an increase in blood pressure. 
following exercise to increase the rate of muscle 
glycogen storage (Ivy et al., 1989). 

PeON e 
Protein 

Inadequate fluid intake during and after physical 
The recommended dietary allowance (RDA) for 

activity results in elevated body temperature, greater 
protein is 0.8 gram per kilogram per day. Athletes 

risk of heat illness, and decrements in performance. 
who perform high-intensity work have elevated 
protein needs to support repairing and replacing 
damaged proteins, maintaining the function of Dehydration is less likely to affect short, high-in- 
metabolic pathways, supporting increases in lean tensity activities such as sprinting, but failure to 
tissue, and aiding the adaptations of bone, ten- adequately replace fluids can decrease perfor- 
dons, and ligaments to physical activity. For elite mance in endurance activities. Armstrong et al. 
endurance athletes, the protein requirement ranges (1985) found that running velocities at distances 
from 1.2 to 1.4 grams per kilogram per day (Rodri- ranging from 1,500 to 10,000 meters (about 1 to 
guez et al., 2009). For elite athletes adding muscle 6 miles) decreased by 3 to 7 percent following a 
mass through high-intensity strength training, the 2 percent decrease in body weight due to fluid 
requirement ranges from 1.2 to 1.7 grams per kilo- loss. To ensure adequate fluid replacement during 
gram per day (Rodriguez et al., 2009). physical activity, drink fluids (e.g., water, carbohy- 

Even though protein requirements are elevated drate-electrolyte drink) at regular intervals (every 
during high-intensity endurance training and 15 to 20 minutes). During activities lasting less 
strength training, athletes do not automatically than 1 hour, consuming carbohydrate-electrolyte 
need to consume additional protein. In fact, in the drinks offers no advantage over plain water. In 
United States, the dietary consumption of protein more prolonged activities, fluids containing a small 
already exceeds the RDA at a mean of 1.5 grams amount of carbohydrate (6 to 8 percent) are more 
per kilogram per day (Moshfegh et al., 2005). There- likely than water to be beneficial in enhancing 
fore, an athlete should meet with a dietitian before fluid absorption and maintaining blood glucose. 
revising his or her diet. Of course, some athletes Fluid replacement can be difficult to accomplish 
consume low levels of protein—for example, those during play in certain sports, such as soccer and 
who do not consume meat—and investigations are field hockey, where the rules do not allow time-outs 
being conducted to determine the most beneficial during competition except for injury. Thus, players 
forms of protein and the optimal time to consume in these sports should drink additional fluid before 
protein (i.e., before or after working out). the contest and during halftime to reduce the fluid 



Chapter 9 |P hysiology of Physical Activity 

deficit. Following activity, continue to drink fluids playing doubles tennis, cycling less than 10 miles 
even though you may not feel thirsty. Thirst is not per hour (16 kilometers per hour), swimming at 
an accurate indicator of the need for fluid. moderate speed, golfing (pulling a cart), climbing 

stairs, and mowing the lawn. 
Iron Intake 

In 1996, the U.S. Department of Health and 
As you know, physical activity cannot take place Human Services released a report titled Physical 
without the transport of oxygen-carrying blood to Activity and Health: A Report of the Surgeon Gen- 
the muscles. Oxygen is transported in the blood eral, which recommended that Americans should 
with the help of iron. In the blood, oxygen essen- accumulate 30 minutes or more of moderate-inten- 
tially rides on the iron atoms in the hemoglobin sity physical activity on most (preferably all) days 
found in red blood cells. Each hemoglobin mole- of the week (USDHHS, 1996). The activity could 
cule contains four iron atoms that bond with four include intermittent activities, in blocks of time as 
oxygen molecules. A person with low iron cannot small as 10 minutes. 
adequately synthesize hemoglobin. As hemoglobin The current Physical Activity Guidelines for Amer- 
concentrations decrease, the amount of oxygen icans (U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser- 
transported to the tissues decreases. Eventually, vices, 2018) are based on a systematic review of the 
the person becomes anemic. Anemia is defined literature resulting in evidence-based physical activity 
as a hemoglobin concentration below 12 grams recommendations. The amount of physical activity 
per deciliter of blood in women and below 13 needed to acquire the many health benefits associ- 
grams per deciliter in men. People with anemia ated with movement for adults is at least 150 to 300 
experience reductions in VO max and in endurance minutes a week of moderate-intensity activity or 75 
(Pasricha et al., 2014). ‘ to 150 minutes a week of vigorous-intensity aerobic 

physical activity. Combinations of moderate and vig- 
orous activity can also be used to meet the guideline. 

ODA a ee a a a a In addition to aerobic activity, muscle-strengthening 

Low iron stores can lead to anemia, which reduces activities for the major muscle groups can provide 

VO,max and exercise endurance. additional health benefits if performed 2 or more days 
a week at a moderate or greater intensity. Greater 
volumes and intensities of physical activity can confer 

Iron deficiency is one of the most common nutri- additional health benefits. 
tional deficiencies in the United States, especially The new guidelines (USDHHS, 2018) emphasize 
among adolescent girls and women. The most likely that any amount of physical activity is valuable in 
causes of iron depletion in physically active women improving health. The original requirement that 
are inadequate iron intake and excessive blood loss activity had to be performed in at least 10-minute 
through menses. Low iron intake in female athletes bouts has been removed in the updated guidelines 
most commonly occurs in those who restrict their to encourage greater movement and less sitting 
caloric intake and those who consume diets that throughout the day. The importance of decreasing 
are low in meat (Clarkson & Haymes, 1995). Heme sedentary behavior, while concurrently increasing 
iron found in meat, fish, and poultry is more highly physical activity, is supported by the relationships 
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract than is the between sedentary behavior and the increased risks 
non-heme iron found in other food sources. People of cardiovascular diseases and all-cause mortality 
can typically avoid iron deficiency by consuming (USDHHS, 2018). 

iron-rich foods daily. 

ESKEY PON ae  
Physical Activity, Fitness, and Health 

The recommended amount of weekly physical activity 
One need not exercise strenuously to gain health 

for improved health and decreased disease risk is 150 
benefits from physical activity. To the contrary, a 

to 300 minutes of moderate-intensity activity or 75 to 
large body of scientific evidence (e.g., Pate et al., 
1995) indicates conclusively that health benefits 150 minutes of vigorous-intensity activity. 

can be obtained by engaging in moderate-intensity 
physical activity on a regular basis. Moderate-inten- Performance-related fitness benefits can also 
sity physical activities include brisk walking (3 to 4 be achieved by performing structured bouts of 
miles per hour, or 4.8 to 6.4 kilometers per hour), exercise. To improve the cardiovascular endurance 



ME 236 Introduction to Kinesiology 

component of fitness, the American College of Sports Effects of Age on Fitness 
Medicine (2018) recommends that adults take part Although research has shown that maximal oxygen 
in exercise 30 to 60 minutes (in at least 10-minute uptake (VO,max) declines with age at the rate of 
bouts) per day on 5 days per week at moderate about 10 percent per decade beginning in a per- 
intensity or 20 to 30 minutes per day (continuously) son’s twenties, the decrease is smaller (5 percent 
on 3 days per week at vigorous intensity. Exercise per decade) in those who remain physically active 
intensities of 64 to 76 percent of maximal heart (Hagberg, 1987). The decline in cardiovascular 
rate are labeled as moderate exercise, and exercise endurance in older people may result in part from 
intensities of 77 to 93 percent of maximal heart rate a reduction in the intensity and duration of physical 
are considered hard or vigorous exercise. Activities activity. This possibility is suggested by the fact that 
that are aerobic and can be maintained for pro- master athletes who maintain their training inten- 
longed periods are best for improving cardiovascular sity experience little change in maximal oxygen 
endurance. These activities include running, hiking, uptake as they age. 
walking, swimming, cross-country skiing, bicycling, VO,max, the primary indicator of cardiovascular 
stair climbing, and rowing. Cardiovascular fitness endurance in adults, increases in absolute terms 
can also be aided by participation in sports—such (liters per minute) with growth in children. Because 
as soccer, field hockey, and tennis—that involve body mass increases with growth, more oxygen is 
high-intensity, intermittent activities carried out over required to supply the active tissue. When VO,max 
prolonged periods. is expressed per kilogram of body mass, however, 

One of the most common reasons for stopping it remains relatively constant or decreases during 
an exercise training program is injury (Pate et al., 

growth (Bar-Or, 1983). Results of several studies 
1995). For this reason, exercise programs designed of children indicate that VO,max per kilogram 
to improve fitness and health should begin with does not increase with training in prepubescent 
moderate-intensity activities and gradually increase children until the peak of the growth spurt occurs 
the intensity and duration of the activities as fit- 

(Zwiren, 1989). This finding does not mean, how- 
ness improves. For example, an exercise program 

ever, that children’s endurance does not improve 
for sedentary adults might begin with walking at before puberty. Instead, improvements in children’s 
a speed of 3 to 4 miles per hour (4.8 to 6.4 kilo- endurance with training may relate to improve- 
meters per hour), which is close to the moderate ments in other factors, such as running economy 
intensity of 64 percent of maximal heart rate, and 

and anaerobic capacity (Rowland, 1989). 
gradually increase in duration from 30 minutes to 
60 minutes. People can begin by walking, progress 
to alternating between walking and jogging, and 
advance to jogging. 

Subdisciplinary Highlight 
Exercise and Immune Function 

The coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic generates questions about how exercise can offer protec- 
tion against infection. While exercise physiologists have not yet generated data on the effects of 
exercise on coronaviruses, there is evidence that long-term exercise supports normal function of 
the immune system and offers protection from other respiratory viral infections, including influ- 
enza (the flu) and the rhinovirus (the common cold; Martin et al., 2009). Woods and colleagues 
(2009) demonstrated that regular endurance exercise improved influenza vaccine responses 
throughout the flu season and reduced illness severity in elderly participants. In mice with active 
influenza, moderate-intensity exercise promoted positive immune cell composition and protected 
the animals from death (Lowder et al., 2005). Our current knowledge indicates that staying active 
will enhance your immune system response to reduce adverse effects of the virus and improve 
symptoms. Exercise immunology researchers will be conducting research so we can understand 
how exercise affects the risk of infection, the severity of symptoms, and recovery from COVID-19 
and future viruses. 



Chapter 9 |P hysiology of Physical Activity 237 

Research and Evidence-Based Practice in Kinesiology 
Weighing the Risks and Benefits of Physical Activity 

The risk-to-benefit ratios of participation in some youth sports have come into question. Although 
we know that sport participation can improve one’s physical and psychological health—and even 
academic performance in children (Strong et al., 2005)—there are also inherent risks of head 
injury associated with activities such as soccer, football, skiing, and baseball (Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, 2011). Concussions and the risk of repeated subconcussive hits have been 
the topic of a major motion picture, television specials, and research funded by the Department 
of Defense, the Centers for Disease Control, and the National Institutes of Health. Researchers 
are studying the long-term health risks of sport-related concussions and how repetitive concus- 
sions sustained in sport by youth and professional athletes may contribute to degenerative brain 
disease. Sport leagues are reviewing policies and rules to minimize the risk of head injuries, and 
parents want to Know and understand the potential risks to their children. 

Physical Activity, Fitness, Physical activity and fitness also play a role in 

and Coronary Heart Disease reducing the risk of hypertension, or high blood 
pressure. Over time, endurance training lowers 

In general, higher levels of fitness are associated 
blood pressure in hypertensive individuals by 

with improved health status. This generally held 
about 10 mmHg (millimeters of mercury). In addi- 

assumption is based on research conducted by 
tion, lower-intensity exercise programs (40 to 70 

exercise physiologists. For instance, Blair and col- 
percent of VO,max) are as effective in reducing 

leagues (1989) found that fitter individuals have 
blood pressure as are those of higher intensity 

a lower relative risk of developing or dying from 
(Fagard, 2001). Among people with normal blood 

cardiovascular disease or cancer than those who are 
pressure, those who are more physically active 

less fit. The investigators based their determination 
have lower blood pressures than those who are 

of physical fitness on a cardiovascular endurance 
less active. 

test. The risk of cardiovascular disease, as well as 
colon cancer, is also reduced by participation in Physical Activity and Weight Control 
physical activities, as distinct from one’s level of 

Participation in daily physical activity helps control 
fitness. Paffenbarger (1994) estimated that engag- 

body weight. Weight gain and weight loss are deter- 
ing in moderate-intensity physical activities added 

mined by the interplay between the consumption 
approximately 1.5 years to life. Moreover, using the 

and the expenditure of calories. Put simply, excess 
number of calories expended weekly in walking, 

caloric consumption results in weight gain. Exercise 
stair climbing, and leisure-time sport as an index 

physiologists have added to our understanding of 
of physical activity, his study showed that Harvard 

caloric expenditure by investigating the process by 
alumni had a 46 percent lower risk of dying from 

which the body expends calories and uses energy. 
cardiovascular disease if they expended 2,500 

The metabolic rate—the rate at which the body 
calories or more per week in physical activities. 

uses energy—increases in direct proportion to the 
Participants in moderate-intensity activities (e.g., 

intensity of activity. Lower-intensity activities, such 
brisk walking, swimming, cycling) had a 37 percent 

as walking at 3 miles (4.8 kilometers) per hour, 
lower risk of cardiovascular disease than did those 

increase the metabolic rate threefold, to a caloric 
who did not participate in leisure-time sport. 

expenditure of about 4 calories per minute. High- 
er-intensity activities, such running at 7 miles (11 

BK EVAR OIN levers! earnten Vor Se Se ee kilometers) per hour, increase the metabolic rate 
tenfold, expending 12.5 calories per minute. Total 

High levels of physical fitness and physical activity energy expenditure also depends on the duration 
lower the risk of developing and dying from cardio- of physical activity. 
vascular disease. Moreover, energy expenditure does not return 
EEna SEEEIEREEERREEE 

to resting levels immediately after an exercise bout. 



MG 238 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Research and Evidence-Based Practice in Kinesiology 
Health Implications of Step Counts 

There is new research to help people better understand the health implications of the step counts 

they get from the apps on their phones and their fitness watches. Higher daily step counts are 

associated with lower mortality risk from all causes. In one investigation, a sample of 4,800 U.S. 

adults wore accelerometers for up to 1 week between 2003 and 2006 and then mortality was 

tracked through 2015. Compared to the all-cause mortality risk associated with taking 4,000 daily 

steps, 8,000 daily steps lowered the risk by 51 percent, and 12,000 daily steps decreased risk 

by 65 percent. Surprisingly, after adjusting for steps per day, there was no association between 

higher stepping intensity and all-cause mortality. If your goal is to improve your health, the important 

point is to take more steps per day, regardless of how hard you are working. 

Rather, researchers have shown that the metabolic to decrease obesity rates. Large-scale population 
rate remains elevated during recovery from phys- studies have shown that obesity has increased 
ical activity. Thus, the total energy expended due dramatically in the United States over the past 25 
to a single bout of exercise is somewhat greater years. These population-based investigations often 
than the energy cost of the activity itself, especially use body mass index (BMD as a surrogate measure 
following high-intensity, longer-duration activity. of obesity. BMI is calculated using a person’s body 

mass and height, as follows: 

KE VOOLN Die a ee tet BMI = body mass in kilograms + the square 
of height in meters 

Energy expenditure during physical activity is directly 
proportional to the activity’s intensity and duration. This practice is accepted because BMI assessment 

is easy and noninvasive, and elevated values are 
indicative of obesity-related disease risk. A BMI of 

Whereas some people seek to maintain body 
more than 30 kilograms per square meter is clas- 

weight through exercise, others want to lose body 
sified as obesity, and the percentage of adults in 

weight and body fat. The recommended exercise 
the United States classified as obese has increased 

dose for weight loss is approximately 150 to 250 
steadily. In 2017-2018, for instance, the age-ad- 

minutes of weekly physical activity (Donnelly et al., 
justed rate had reached 42.4 percent of adults in 

2009). When caloric intake exceeds caloric expen- 
the United States, with no difference between males 

diture, the excess calories are converted to fat and 
and females (Hales et al., 2020). The problem of 

stored in adipose tissue. Sedentary people are more 
obesity is also apparent in younger segments of 

likely to be overweight or obese, a condition that 
the U.S. population (Hales et al., 2017). The prev- 

puts them at increased risk of developing coronary 
alence of obesity in U.S. children aged 2 to 5 years 

heart disease (Willett et al., 1995); they are also at 
in 2015-2016 was about 13.9 percent (Hales et al., 

higher risk of developing non-insulin-dependent 
2017). The rates are even higher for children aged 

diabetes mellitus (NIDDM; Paffenbarger, 1994). 
6 to 11 years (18.4 percent) and for adolescents 

Reducing body weight is effective in lowering serum 
aged 12 to 19 years (20.6 percent). 

triglycerides and reducing blood pressure in those 
These statistics are alarming, especially given 

with hypertension. Furthermore, participation in 
that the risk of developing many chronic diseases 

daily physical activity is beneficial not only in reduc- 
is greater in persons who are obese. More specif- 

ing the risk of NIDDM but also in helping those with 
ically, obese men and women have a higher risk 

this condition to regulate their blood glucose levels. 
of developing heart disease, hypertension, and 

Now that you have gained some basic knowl- 
NIDDM; these diseases are also associated with 

edge about the physiological systems and some 
physical inactivity. Impaired glucose tolerance, a 

of their responses during physical activity, we 
preliminary stage in the development of NIDDM, 

will examine one of the most pressing problems 
was found in 25 percent of obese children and 21 

facing physiologists of physical activity today: how 
percent of obese adolescents (Sinha et al., 2002). 



Chapter 9 |P hysiology of Physical Activity 239 

How Far Do You Need to Run to Lose 1 Pound? 

An excess caloric expenditure of 3,500 calories is needed to lose 1 pound (0.45 kilogram). If a 
person burns 100 calories per mile when running (jogging), how many miles would this person 
need to run to lose 1 pound? How many days per week do you run? How many miles do you usually 
run each time? Assuming that your diet is constant, calculate how long it will take you to lose 1 
pound from running. 

Overweight and obesity are also related to an activity in physical education classes; providing 
elevated risk of some forms of cancer in adults, more opportunities for children and adolescents to 
including endometrial (inner lining of the uterus) participate in physical activity before, during, and 
and breast cancer in women and colon cancer in after school; building walking and bicycle paths 
both women and men. that are separated from roadways; and increasing 

People can lose body weight by reducing opportunities for adult participation in physical 
caloric intake, increasing physical activity, or a activity at worksites, in shopping malls, and in 
combination of the two. Exercise physiologists are community facilities. 
particularly interested in studying the effects on 
body weight of increased physical activity and of 
programs that combine dietary components and Wrap-Up 
exercise. Researchers have found that creating a This chapter provides an overview of the knowl- 
caloric deficit through a combination of physical edge base of physiology of physical activity. This 
activity and diet management is as effective as subdiscipline of kinesiology centers on the acute 
dieting alone in reducing body weight. As this and chronic changes that occur in the physiology 
research suggests, collaboration between exercise of the human body in response to physical activity. 
physiologists and researchers in other fields, such Exercise scientists have studied and measured these 
as dietetics and exercise psychology, may help us changes to help people be healthier and improve 
to determine the best methods of improving body their physical performance. 
composition. Exercise science professionals work in many 

The challenge is how to get more people to arenas, including universities and clinical, corpo- 
participate regularly in physical activity. Only half rate, and commercial fitness programs. In addi- 
of adults in the United States regularly participate tion, research opportunities exist in the military 
in 150 minutes of moderate-intensity or 75 minutes and other government organizations. If you are 
of vigorous-intensity physical activity per week, interested in learning more about how the body 
and about one in four adults participates in no responds and adapts to physical activity and exer- 
leisure-time physical activity (U.S. Department of cise, you can begin by taking courses in exercise 
Health and Human Services et al., 2015). Women physiology, anatomy, and physiology. You are also 
are less likely than men to participate regularly in encouraged to visit the web resources listed at the 
physical activity, and older adults are less likely to end of this chapter to learn more about the edu- 
do so than young adults. Several strategies have cational and certification opportunities available 
been proposed for increasing daily physical activ- to you in exercise physiology and other spheres 
ity, including increasing the amount of physical of kinesiology. 

_MORE INFORMATION ON PHYSIOLOGY OF PHYSICAL ACTIVITY 

Organizations 

American College of Sports Medicine 

American Council on Exercise 

American Society of Exercise Physiologists 

Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology 

Exercise & Sports Science Australia 

National Strength and Conditioning Association 



Ge 240 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Journals 
ACSM'’s Health & Fitness Journal 

Applied Physiology, Nutrition, and Metabolism 

Biology of Sport 

British Journal of Sports Medicine 

European Journal of Applied Physiology 

Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews 

International Journal of Exercise Science 

International Journal of Sports Physiology and Performance 

Journal of Applied Physiology 

Journal of Exercise Physiology Online 

Journal of Physical Activity and Health 

Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport 

Journal of Sports Medicine and Physical Fitness 

Journal of Sports Sciences 

Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 

Measurement in Physical Education and Exercise Science 

Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 

Pediatric Exercise Science 

Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport 

Sports Medicine 

Translational Journal of the American College of Sports Medicine 

JREVIEW_QUESTIONS. 3 SS eee 
1. How does physiology of physical activity fit within the discipline of kinesiology? 

2. Describe the contributions made to physiology of physical activity by A.V. Hill, David Bruce 
Dill, and other key scholars. 

3. Give examples of how VO,max can be measured in the laboratory and estimated in the field. 

4. Explain how knowledge of exercise physiology might be used to help each of the following: 
a college athlete, a cardiac patient, a person trying to lose weight. 

5. Calculate your maximum heart rate, then measure your heart rate while you are performing 
each of three physical activities. Which of the activities meets the intensity guideline to help 
improve your cardiovascular endurance? 

6. How might you estimate the metabolic cost of field-based physical activities like rock 
climbing or mountain biking? 

7. Get up and move at high intensity for a few minutes. List the physiological changes that 
you notice and explain why each occurred. 

8. What health improvements result from being physically active on a regular basis? 

is io K Prope |» ) Go to HKPropel to complete the activities for this chapter. 



Practicing a Profession 
in Physical Activity 

a We 

% 

——— 

Michael Zagaris/San Francisco 49ers/Getty Images 
eS 

For some people, experiencing physical activity and studying it are ends in them- 

selves. Like some psychology or history majors, some kinesiology majors make their 

choice not because they plan to carve out a career in the field but simply because 

they are interested in acquiring as much knowledge about it as they can. Thus, the 

popularity of kinesiologays  a liberal arts subject has increased over the past few 

decades. 



a 242 Part Ill 

For most kinesiology majors, however, experiencing and studying physical activity are also means 

to the goal of initial preparation for a career in a physical activity profession. This preparation 

usually requires mastery of another type of knowledge beyond those described in parts | and Il 

of this book. Professional experience in physical activity—the application of skills to help clients, 

students, athletes, or patients achieve specific goals in real-world conditions—rests on knowledge 

obtained from professional experience in physical activity. If this sounds circular, remember that 

knowledge derived from professional practice is often incorporated into the discipline of kinesiology. 

When systematic knowledge—usually developed by careful observation of how various manipula- 

tions of physical activity affect clients—is included in kinesiology curriculums, it becomes part of 
the discipline. Because this knowledge of professional practice is part of the curriculum, you will 
be required to master it by demonstrating both your understanding of it and your ability to use it. 

Those who work in the field of physical activity assume the responsibilities and obligations 
that belong to all professionals. Chapter 10 introduces you to what it means to be a professional, 
the obligations and opportunities, and the steps that you can take now to enable your success 
as a professional. The rest of part Ill explores five professional career areas: health (including 
wellness) and fitness, medicine and allied health, teaching physical education, coaching and sport 
instruction (including sport performance and analytics), and sport management. 

To help you organize your thoughts about the types of work and worksites available to kine- 
siology majors, we have grouped the many careers according to general objectives and goals, 
working environments, and qualifications for professionals. Part II| does not cover all careers 
open to kinesiology majors. Some graduates seek advanced degrees in kinesiology and devote 
their lives to studying, researching, and teaching about physical activity at an advanced level as 
college professors or research scientists. In addition, advancements in science often mean that 
the future will offer careers that are currently unknown to us. 

If you’re like some of your peers, you may be somewhat uncertain about which physical activity 
career you will pursue. This uncertainty is normal and shouldn’t cause you any anxiety at this 
point. In fact, one of the objectives of this part of the book is to help you determine whether you 
are suited to a career in kinesiology and, if you decide that you are, to help you chart a course 
for your professional future. Thus, part Ill should move you closer to selecting a career. As you go 
through this process, keep in mind that this choice may be only the first of several career choices 
that you make over the course of your working years—two, three, and even four changes in career 
are likely for people currently entering the workforce. Nevertheless, you should make the most 
intelligent career choice possible, and this section will help you accomplish that goal. 

Physical activity 
experience 

Professional 
experience in 

physical activity 

Scholarship 
of 

physical activity 



Becoming a Physical 
Activity Professional 

Duane V. Knudson and Timothy A. Brusseau 

In this chapter, we will 

© acquaint you with what it meanstoa be:a  professionalo nd more 
specifically, a physical activity professional, oe 

e explain the types of Cuan andS kills essential fo"rp erforming, 
professional work, oe e 

e discuss what you need to do during you r undergraduate years ii1n  order - . : . 
to gain entry into and succeed in your chosen professional field, and 

e help you determine whether you are suited fora  career in ao e 

activity Preteen 



Marilyn WAS an accomplished athlete, so friends and relatives assumed that she would 
pursue a career as a physical education teacher and coach. Marilyn wasn’t so sure. She loved 

sport and physical activity but thought that a different type of work might present new and different 

challenges. : 

During the summer between her junior and senior years of high school, Marilyn worked as a 

counselor at a camp for children with physical or intellectual disability. Going into the role, she 

wasn't sure she would like it, but she soon found herself amazed at the grit and determination the 

children displayed. She was inspired, and she noted the satisfaction experienced by the nurses, z 

therapists, and doctors, for whom their patients’ gratitude was worth more than money. a 

Thus, it came as no surprise to Marilyn’s fellow camp counselors when she enrolled at a local col- 

lege as an adapted physical education major. With its focus on delivering modified physical education 

programs for people with physical or mental challenges, 
the program meshed well with her 
interests and experience. After 
earning her degree, she secured 
a position as an adapted physical 
education teacher and found a 
rewarding career in helping students 
with a variety of disabilities. 

In order to improve her teaching 
and service to children, Marilyn also 
became active with colleagues in 
a State-level professional organiza- 
tion and in other disability-support 

_ professions (nursing, special edu- 
cation, therapeutic recreation). In 

addition, she went through the nec- 
essary steps to achieve professional 
‘recognition as a certified adapted 
physical educator. : 

Committing to a career early in your college experi- first career choice will probably not be your last. 
ence can be a scary proposition. It can be daunting However, there are distinct advantages to choos- 
to think about making a decision at this early stage ing a career early. First, midstream career changes 
that will determine a major part of your identity for can disrupt your personal and family life, can be 
the rest of your life. If you have this fear, focus on costly, and can set back your progress toward an 
your passion, and try not to worry—people often ultimate career goal. Second, students who identify 
change careers more than once, though what may a career track early in their college experience are 
be described technically as encore careers some- much better able to relate their course work to that 
times occur within the same general field. Many career. In addition, because they know the type 
kinesiology majors seeking admission to graduate of work they like and want to do, these students 
programs in medicine and allied health (such as can gain experience in preprofessional intern and 
athletic training, physical therapy, occupational assistant roles and begin to develop a network of 
therapy, physician assistant) may need to be open associates in the profession while still in college. 
to backup career plans if they cannot win one of Many graduate professional schools require these 
these highly competitive spots (Brusseau, 2018). experiences of all applicants. 

This chapter and those that follow are designed So, if you have already committed to a specific 
to help you make a career choice in kinesiology career in the field of kinesiology, you may be ahead 
as early in your studies as possible. Granted, your of the game. You're likely to enjoy your study of 

me 244 



Chapter 10| Becoming a Physical Activity Professional 

kinesiology a bit more and derive more from it ulums adopted by most kinesiology departments 
than students who have yet to make that commit- to help you prepare for your chosen field. 
ment. If you are still trying to decide on a career, Not all workers are professionals. A profession 
this part of the text should help you narrow your is a particular line of work, and a professional 
career choices. In fact, even if you have already is a particular type of worker. Teachers, doctors, 
decided on a career, the chapters in this section lawyers, and physical therapists are professionals. 
should interest you as a budding kinesiologist who Janitors, house painters, plumbers, electricians, 
shares with his or her colleagues a special interest carpenters, computer technicians, athletes, and 
in physical activity. other tradespersons may describe their expertise 

For most students, getting a good job tops the list as “professional,” but the character of their work 
of reasons for going to college. You probably expect generally lacks characteristics associated with the 
your college degree to help you find a well-paying professions. Knowing why this is the case will 
job that is respected by the community, offers good help you better understand the distinctive roles, 
working conditions, and provides a reasonable responsibilities, educational requirements, and 
amount of time off for leisure pursuits. No doubt compensation in the type of work to which you 
you also want your job to count for something, to aspire. 
contribute to society in some substantial way. In The kinesiology curriculum may prepare you for 
addition, many people want a job that is so enjoy- a specific career in the physical activity professions, 
able to them that they feel energized by their work or it may serve as the first step to a career in a 
and sometimes willingly invest more time than the physical activity profession requiring postgraduate 
job requires. Furthermore, the ideal job should be education. To be clear, when we speak of a physical 
one that not just anybody can do; that is, it should activity profession, we mean a profession in which 
require specialized skills that set you apart from physical activity plays a central role—for example, 
others in the workforce. A professional career puts teaching physical education, coaching, serving as 
you in control of most decisions about your work. a corporate fitness consultant or fitness director, 
Last, but certainly not least, you want a job that or serving as an athletic trainer or conditioning 
centers on physical activity! specialist for a sport team. Most of the physical 

Having the freedom to make decisions is one of activity professions can be grouped into relatively 
the advantages of being a professional. However, distinct areas of expertise or professional practice 
with freedom comes responsibility, because the (see the figure in the part III opener). Keep in mind 
quality of your decisions determines how success- that these areas or “scope of practice” represent 
ful your services to clients will be and ultimately general categories and that each is made up of 
how successful you will be in your chosen profes- several professional occupations. 
sion. Will you be a good, evidence-based decision The chapters that follow in this part of the book 
maker? Will the decisions you make increase the describe some of the most popular careers available 
health, well-being, and enjoyment of the students, in the physical activity professions to students who 
clients, patients, or customers you serve? Or will graduate from a kinesiology program. Before we 
your decisions result in wasted time and effort and go any further, however, you need to know exactly 
perhaps jeopardize the safety of those who depend what we mean by the term professional since, as a 
on you? Will your decisions be grounded in the physical activity professional, you will be expected 
knowledge and skills that you acquired in your to exhibit the general attributes and expectations— 
kinesiology program? Or will you make decisions and share in the obligations—of those who work 
entirely by the “seat of your pants” or the “way in professional fields, whether they are lawyers, 
we always do it”? An undergraduate education in counselors, clergypersons, or physicians. 
kinesiology is the first major step in teaching you 
to make correct evidence-based decisions using 
the best available knowledge. What Is a Profession? 

If this description applies to the position you Recall that people often use the term professional in 
hope to secure following graduation, then you an informal way to describe the general quality of 
have already narrowed your choice down to the a person’s performance or the work that a person 
professions, but there are many professions. This does. For instance, the work of a cabinetmaker may 
chapter is intended to help you decide whether a be described as “very professional,” or a person 
career in a physical activity profession is right for who is an excellent plumber may be described 
you. The chapter also explores the general curric- as “a real pro.” At other times, we use the term to 



a 246 Introduction to Kinesiology 

describe those who play or teach a sport as a full- figure 10.1. Although physicians and lawyers may 

time source of income (e.g., professional baseball be considered at the extreme professional end of 

players, tennis and golf pros who teach at clubs) the continuum and day laborers may be located at 

in order to distinguish them from people who play the extreme nonprofessional end, most types of 

only part-time and receive no remuneration (..e., work probably fall at some point along the contin- 

amateurs). These usages, however, do not convey uum. To underscore this point, some of the physical 

the strict, formal meaning of the term. Normally, activity professions are termed minor professions 
we do not think of cabinetmakers or athletes as or semiprofessions (Lawson, 1984). Workers in the 
members of a profession in the same way that we jobs that are positioned closest to the professional 
think of lawyers, physicians, teachers, counselors, pole of the continuum 
physical therapists, rehabilitation specialists, or * master complex skills that are grounded 
clergypersons as members of a profession (Etzioni, in and guided by systematic theory and 
1969). Surely, members of a profession are known research; 
for doing their work well and for doing it full-time 

* perform services for others, known as clients 
and for pay, but that is far from the whole story. 

or patients; 

* are granted a monopoly by the community 

AeNS Gs UL Eee  to supply certain services to their members, 
usually through advanced education and 

Those who are preparing for physical activity profes- 
licensure; 

sions should know what a profession is, what type of 
work professionals do, how one gains entry to and * are guided by formal and informal ethical 

codes intended to preserve the health and 
acceptance in a profession, and the obligations of 

well-being of their clients; and 
professionals. 

* meet the expectations and standards pre- 
scribed by their professional subcultures. 

Professional types of occupations have been 
described in terms of a cluster of attributes Mastering Complex Skills 
(Greenwood, 1957; Jackson, 1970). Although some 
characterizations of a profession may seem a bit Grounded in Theory 
idealistic, they provide useful models for helping The hallmark of professional work is that it draws 
us understand the distinctions and responsibilities on a complex body of knowledge and theory 
of this type of work. You will discover that most developed through systematic research. This is not 
types of work are not easily classified as being required for strictly manual work (e.g., day labor, 
either completely professional or completely non- some work in restaurants, landscaping, manufactur- 
professional. Instead, they fall along a continuum ing). Because the workplace in general is becoming 
of professional to nonprofessional, as shown in more reliant on electronic and computer technol- 

Professional occupations Nonprofessional occupations 

Major professions Minor professions Nonprofessions 

All of the characteristics Some of the characteristics None of the characteristics 
of professions of professions of professions S 

FHAUTHOKY Occupations can be located along a continuum ranging from profession to nonprofession. 



Chapter 10| Becoming a Physical Activity Professional 

ogy, specialized knowledge is becoming more (perceptual skill), be able to analyze workers’ 
important, even in occupations once considered movements in order to determine the reasons for 
nonprofessional. This point deserves emphasis: injuries (cognitive skill), be able to devise strategies 
Determining what is and what isn’t a profession to correct the movements and reduce injuries (cog- 
can pose a challenge. nitive skill), and be able to explain their findings 

Professionals are sometimes referred to as prac- to workers and supervisors (interpersonal skill). 
titioners (derived from practice), a term signifying Athletic trainers must have perceptual skills that 
that they are not merely gifted thinkers but also enable them to spot hazards and potential sources 
gifted doers. Professionals establish their reputa- of injuries, physical skills for conducting orthopedic 
tions by bringing about predetermined outcomes tests, cognitive skills of analysis and deduction for 
efficiently and effectively, usually on behalf of determining correct emergency procedures, and 
others. Doing so requires skill; in fact, the expert communication skills for relating their findings 
skill of professionals is what sets them apart from to physicians or motivating athletes to adhere to 
other types of workers. We usually associate the rehabilitation schedules. Becoming a professional, 
concept of skill with moving—for instance, the then, involves recognizing the relevant factors in 
speed of a world-class sprinter or the agility of a any situation, knowing what steps must be taken 
pro basketball player. Surely, some professions do to produce a desired result based on research and 
require deft motor skills—dentistry and surgery, for theory in the field, having the skill to achieve the 
example—but motor skills are merely one category result, and communicating a plan of action to a 
of skill. Here are three other categories of skills client, student, or patient. 
that are critically important in professional work: How are these important skills acquired? Often, 
cognitive skills, which include analysis, deduction, professional expertise is developed from experi- 
diagnosis, prescription, and high-level reasoning; ence in performing and watching others perform 
perceptual skills, which enable a person to iden- physical activity (see figure 10.2). This type of 
tify and recognize existing problems or anticipate knowledge is discussed as physical activity experi- 
ones likely to occur; and interpersonal skills, ence in part I of this book. For example, although 
such as listening, communicating, and motivating. not all soccer, basketball, or gymnastics coaches 

Development of these skills is essential if pro- were elite performers, most have spent time per- 
fessionals are to make expert decisions about their forming and watching their sport, and they are 
professional practices. For example, biomechan- familiar with the contexts in which it takes place. 
ics or ergonomics professionals who work for a Later in this chapter, we talk more about the con- 
corporation must have a keen eye for movement tribution of physical activity experience to your 

Professional expertise 

Theoretical Physical Professional 
Workplace 

kinesiology activity practice 
knowledge 

knowledge experience knowledge 

Getae0] 9M any kinds of knowledge form the foundation of professional expertise. 



ME 248 Introduction to Kinesiology 

professional development. set of problems and contexts. Because one brick 

The skills of a physical activity professional also wall is pretty much like another, even laypersons 

derive from knowledge of theory about physical can buy books about home repair and, simply 

activity. As discussed in chapter 1, kinesiology by reading, serve as their own, albeit low-skilled, 

theory is embedded in concepts and principles bricklayers. In contrast, the work of a physical 

related to physical activity that are taught in the activity professional entails solving a wide variety 

subdisciplines. Of course, not all kinesiology theory of difficult problems involving complex human 
applies directly to every task that a professional beings in a variety of contexts. People cannot learn 
performs, just as not all theoretical knowledge in to do this simply by reading manuals. 
medicine applies to every case (every person with For example, physical education teachers may 
a particular illness or condition) that a physician observe technique errors in students’ motor per- 
treats. For example, learning how to calculate the formance that they have never seen before. When 
theoretically optimal angle for the shot put in faced with such a situation, they can systematically 
biomechanics class may not translate into useful apply their knowledge of biomechanics, motor 
athlete-specific prescriptions for a track coach, and learning, and pedagogy—and use a diagnostic 
learning the details of pulmonary function in exer- eye developed through practice—to devise prac- 
cise physiology class may not usually be directly tice experiences that enable students to correct 
applicable to an athletic trainer’s work that focuses errors and improve performance. Similarly, an 
more on musculoskeletal issues. Contextual (envi- athletic trainer confronted with a rare injury may 
ronmental and client) factors weigh heavily on how rely on her in-depth knowledge of biomechanics, 
professionals apply their specialized knowledge. orthopedic testing, emergency medicine, and other 

Nevertheless, because kinesiology theory kinesiology concepts to determine the best course 
focuses on broad principles of physical activity, it of emergency treatment until further diagnostic 
may exert a potent, albeit indirect, effect on the tests can be performed. Thus, mastering theoretical 
way professionals think and the skills they use knowledge of kinesiology enables professionals 
to solve problems. Understanding the big picture to understand the fundamental bases of problems 
can help professionals to adapt knowledge to new (biomechanical, physiological, social, etc.), ask 
situations, integrate knowledge of the principles intelligent questions about their work, and devise 
of physical activity, and think flexibly. Contrast flexible strategies for solving problems—even 
this, for example, with bricklaying and carpentry, those they have never before encountered. In many 
which are truly respectable forms of work known ways kinesiology professionals are challenged to 
as trades or crafts. These jobs certainly require the prescribe physical activity based on clear knowl- 
use of cognitive and perceptual skills, but the skills edge and theory (See the sidebar Research and 
needed are almost always applied to a fairly stable Evidence-Based Practice in Kinesiology) 

A Simple Rule of Thumb 

Here is a practical tip for professionals from someone who has succeeded in the business world. 
The sentiment he expresses applies to most professional settings (Satell, 2010): 

Over the years, I’ve come up with a simple litmus test that has been extremely useful in 
making personnel decisions and choosing partners: Professionals solve more problems than 
they create. Whenever | need to make a decision about entering or extending a relationship, 
| apply that standard. . . . Problems are rarely caused for want of competence but usually 
stem from ill-placed pride and a lack of common decency. Many feel that because they 
work for a big company, have a big title, and know a lot of things (especially acronyms), 
they are entitled to make it difficult for others. How else can they advertise their stature? 
True professionals look to solve problems. They want to help people, seek out “win-win” 
situations, and are willing to shoulder the burden when things go wrong. Their self-worth 
is defined by what they do for others, not what they can do to them and get away with. 

Which one are you? 



Chapter 10| Becoming a Physical Activity Professional 249 

>KEV PON ee a ee electronic equipment, how to schedule patients 

Professionals develop cognitive, perceptual, and inter- for examinations, how to access and edit medical 
records, and how to follow procedures for opening 

personal skills—anchored in theoretical, workplace, and 
and closing the facility. Such tasks are not profes- 

professional practice knowledge—that enable them 
sional in their scope and do not require highly 

to achieve predetermined outcomes efficiently and 
sophisticated knowledge, but they are important. 

effectively. This knowledge also helps them deal with A cardiac rehabilitation technician who does not 
new and unique situations. keep the equipment in proper working condition, 

or a strength and conditioning coach who doesn’t 
maintain a clean and safe workout facility, may 

Physical activity experience and theoretical 
soon be unemployed, regardless of the quality of 

knowledge, though crucial, are not sufficient in 
their professional skills. 

themselves. Professionals’ skillful behavior is also 
guided—and their reputations determined—by 
their wealth of professional practice knowledge. Performing Services for Clients or Patients 
This type of knowledge is not acquired mainly by Most professional work takes the form of services 
reading, nor can it be fully evaluated by written performed for others. Service involves giving assis- 
examinations. Rather, professional practice knowl- tance or advantage to others, usually in a spirit of 
edge is what some have called “knowledge in helpfulness and concern. Those who are employed 
action” (Schon, 1995). It can be seen, for example, in service work such as nursing, social work, family 
in a physician’s competence in diagnosing diseases counseling, public health, recreation, and kinesiol- 
and in the skill with which a lawyer assembles a ogy are increasingly being referred to as members 
convincing case for a court trial. In kinesiology, of the helping professions (Lawson, 1998b). The 
professional practice knowledge may be reflected beneficiaries of a professional’s services are known 
in an athletic director’s expertise at recruiting and as Clients. (In the allied medical fields, clients are 
retaining effective coaches, in a fitness leader’s patients; in teaching, they are students.) Most pro- 
skill at prescribing effective exercises for a client fessionals enjoy meeting and working with people, 
who is recovering from a heart attack, and in an feel comfortable in social settings, and derive great 
athletic trainer’s skill at treating an on-field injury. satisfaction from helping people meet needs and 

Finally, professionals rely on workplace knowl- accomplish important goals. 
edge, which is knowledge about performing the You always should keep in mind the following 
relatively mundane but important standard operat- three important aspects of service: 
ing procedures (SOPs) associated with their jobs. > Professionals are committed to helping 
Workplace knowledge requires little formal educa- others. One often hears professionals describe 
tion or training. For example, cardiac rehabilitation their career as a calling, which suggests that their 
technologists must know how to maintain their 

Research and Evidence-Based Practice in Kinesiology 
Challenges in Applying Research Findings 

Sometimes there are differences between the participants in published research and those with 
whom physical activity professionals are working, and this can make it difficult to apply research 
and theory in practice. For example, an adapted physical educator working with a child shooting 
a basketball from a wheelchair cannot use typical shooting trajectory data from biomechanics 
because this research is primarily based on able-bodied adults, often skilled athletes. Instead, 
the educator can apply the general principles of biomechanics (Knudson, 2021) and available 

research on adult wheelchair shooting (Nunome et al., 2002), while accounting for the differences 

that a young person in a wheelchair will display in strength and height of release, to provide instruc- 

tional cues and feedback. Evidence-based practice should integrate the theoretical and scientific 

knowledge that is available from scholarship, knowledge gained from professional practice, and 

knowledge of the client and his or her values. Most often specific models or systems of weighing 

evidence for practice are taught in graduate and professional schools. 



aS 250 Introduction to Kinesiology 

primary motivation is to enhance the health, edu- in a teacher who volunteers her time to give reme- 

cation, enjoyment, and general well-being of those dial instruction to a student on the weekend or a 

they serve. In fact, concern for the well-being of geriatric fitness leader who stays late after each 

clients often supersedes professionals’ concern for session to give special attention to an elderly man 

their own comfort, financial compensation, and who feels too embarrassed to exercise with others 

satisfaction. For instance, you may have known present. Obviously, becoming an effective profes- 

physicians or lawyers who sacrificed lucrative sional need not entail such sacrifices, but wanting 

practices in order to work with people who were to help others is a prerequisite for such work. 
poor and disadvantaged. The same spirit appears 

What Does Being a Professional Really Mean? 

The term professional is used in many ways. Consider whether it is used appropriately or inappro- 
priately in each of the following examples. 

> An athletic trainer shares information about one athlete’s injury with another athlete. Her 
supervisor reprimands her for not conducting herself as a professional. 

An award is bestowed on a physical education professor for having provided 25 years of 
distinguished professional service to the university. 

A personal trainer is heard repeatedly giving clients misinformation about nutrition and 
exercise. The fitness director tells him that he is not behaving in a professional manner. 

An athletic director praises a laundry room employee for having the highest professional 
standards. 

A physical education teacher tells her colleague that he should join SHAPE America because 
it is the professional thing to do. 

There are widely varying definitions of profession, professional, and professionalism among 
people in a variety of fields that offer services to the public. The definition offered by the Profes- 
sional Standards Councils, which works to improve standards of practice and protect consumers 
in Australia, is applicable to many professions: 

A profession is a disciplined group of individuals who adhere to ethical standards. This 
group positions itself as possessing special knowledge and skills in a widely recognized 
body of learning derived from research, education and training at a high level, and is 
recognized by the public as such. A profession is also prepared to apply this knowledge 
and exercise these skills in the interest of others. (Professional Standards Councils, n.d.) 

What then is professionalism? According to the late Eliot Friedson, a sociologist who spent 
most of his life studying the topic, “Professionalism exists when an organized occupation gains 
the power to determine who is qualified to perform a defined set of tasks, to prevent all others 
from performing that work, and to control the criteria by which to evaluate performance” (Friedson, 
ZOO Trond 2). 

A more expansive definition has been offered by a representative of the International Bar Asso- 
ciation (McGuigan, 2007), who believed that lawyers should reflect professionalism by 

> dedicating themselves to serving clients before self, 

> dedicating themselves to serving the public interest, improving the law, and improving the 
profession, 

devoting themselves to honesty, integrity, and good character, and 

maintaining competence in a specialized body of knowledge and skills, which are freely 
shared with other professionals. 

What similarities and differences (either literal or implied) do you find in these definitions? 



Chapter 10| Becoming a Physical Activity Professional 

>» Professionals render expert service. While most physical activity is one of the safest and 
Being a professional means more than simply most effective forms of expression, there can be too 
being willing to help. Professionals know how to much of a good thing, and professionals recom- 
determine a client’s needs and how to initiate and mend effective and safe kinds of physical activity. 
evaluate an appropriate course of evidence-based >» Professionals should not encourage their 
practice to meet those needs. As a result, profes- clients to become totally dependent on their 
sionals are granted a certain amount of autonomy services. It is inevitable that clients, patients, and 
to carry out their work. Their diagnoses and opin- students will become somewhat dependent on 
ions are respected, and they usually have a great authority figures in the early stages of treatment, 
deal of freedom to make decisions about how they but such dependence can be undesirable when it 
help clients. That freedom comes with an ethical results in professionals’ adopting a paternalistic 
responsibility to provide effective service that ben- attitude toward those they serve. Ideally, a profes- 
efits the client with a low risk of harm. Famous sional and a client work collaboratively to achieve 
almost-impossible oaths (Abbasi, 2019) are the common goals. This is not to say that a client 
Hippocratic Oath often taken by physicians and should have abject faith that a professional will 
the Ritual Calling of an Engineer often taken by keep his or her best interests in mind when making 
engineers with an iron ring ceremony in Canada. decisions. One of the most egregious violations of 

Professionalism in the Workplace 

Certain key values, attitudes, and behaviors are important in any type of professional work. The 
following list presents recommendations from a leader in the communication industry (Feignbaum, 
2012). 

Personal Appearance 
At work, perception matters. Thus, a person with talent, skill, and ability may not be taken seriously 
if he or she comes to work ungroomed, disheveled, or dressed inappropriately. Moreover, in many 
health care professions, certain clothing and grooming are required, not only to ensure a respectful 
look but also to protect patients from disease and adverse reactions. 

Emotional Baggage 
Being professional includes checking your personal issues at the door when you come to work. 
Doing your job properly and professionally means not letting what happens at home affect your 
work performance. It also means not letting people push your emotional hot buttons. 

Respect 
Respect provides the foundation of workplace success with superiors, co-workers, employees, 
customers, and clients. Whatever your company culture may be, everyone responds to respect. 
Keep in mind also that your workplace conduct represents not just your organization—it also 

represents you. 

Communication 

Savvy professionals know how to communicate clearly to a variety of audiences. Knowing who 

to keep informed, when to use discretion, and when to clearly disseminate information is part of 

what separates the good from the great. Listening to and really understanding people does not 

go unnoticed. 

Integrity 

Along with respect, integrity is one of the highest professional values. In fact, some professions 

(e.g., law, medicine, journalism) have established professional codes of ethics. Even when the 

career or profession doesn’t mandate it, maintaining your own code of ethics helps you be an 

invaluable and respected professional. 



MM 252 Introduction to Kinesiology 

professional conduct is exploiting the vulnerability which they operate. The purpose of this certificate 

of a client by making decisions that are self-serv- is to ensure that only professionals who have met 

ing or that stretch far beyond the professional's the minimum standards of educational preparation 
area of expertise. A coach who orders an injured will be admitted to the monopoly that is allowed 

player back into the game will quickly lose the to practice the profession of teaching. 
respect of colleagues, as will a physical therapist 
who, not wanting to suffer financial loss, fails to Ensuring High Standards 
refer a patient to a competitor even though the 

and Ethical Practices 
competitor is better equipped to meet the patient's 
specific needs. Professionals recognize that society has granted 

them authority to regulate their own conduct 
and expects them to do it. Violation of accepted 

cA NOVA LOS Ws thea nee RR ERR professional standards by a single professional 

The touchstone of professional work is the delivery of threatens all members of the profession by bringing 

expert, evidence-based services to improve the quality into question the legitimacy of the monopoly they 

of life for others, always with priority given to the client’s have been granted. So professionals have a huge 
stake in maintaining or improving not only the 

welfare and safety. 
quality of their own practices but also the quality 
of service delivered by all members of their pro- 
fession. Therefore, whether professionals work at 

Possessing a Monopoly clinics, schools, hospitals, or other agencies, they 
on the Delivery of Services view themselves primarily as representatives of the 

Society values professionals because they provide profession as a whole. 

needed services that are unavailable from any Because the knowledge base for the physical 

other occupational group. If you need a cavity activity professions is expanding continually, 

filled, you go to a dentist. If you need spiritual exercise leaders, teachers, trainers, sport leaders, 

guidance, you may go to a member of the clergy. and other professionals can easily become out- 

If you need to rehabilitate an injured knee to play dated in their knowledge and skills. Professionals 

basketball again, you go to a physical therapist whose practices are not in accord with the latest 

or athletic trainer. Governments and professional knowledge become a threat to all professionals in 

organizations control access to professions through the field. For example, a clinical exercise physiol- 

requirements for education and licensure. ogist who fails to keep abreast of her field is in 
danger of recommending activities to clients that 
recent research has shown to be inferior or even 

KEV DON Se dangerous. Such a person may face accusations of 

Professionals are granted monopolies because only unprofessional practice. 
Keeping updated will require you to participate 

they possess the necessary knowledge and skills to 
in professional organizations, regularly read pro- 

meet particular needs of the community. 
fessional books and articles, and attend confer- 
ences, workshops, and other meetings sponsored 

The physical activity professions came into by professional societies. Unlike salespersons, 

existence and continue to flourish because society business executives, or others in the commercial 

recognizes that people in such positions make a marketplace, who tend to protect information from 

unique and valuable contribution to the health their competitors, members of a profession relate 

and well-being of all. In the case of kinesiology, to each other as colleagues and willingly share 
no other discipline prepares people with the back- specialized knowledge in order to serve the best 
ground knowledge and skills to meet such a diverse interests of their clients. If you want to be a top- 
range of physical activity-related needs. In this notch professional, you must commit to educating 
sense, kinesiology and the physical activity profes- yourself continually; in fact, it is not too early to 
sionals it prepares have a monopoly on the deliv- join a professional organization while still in your 
ery of physical activity services. That monopoly undergraduate years. In addition, in order to hold 
is protected by various certification and licensing a professional license or certification over time, a 
arrangements. Teachers, for example, usually must professional must usually obtain continuing edu- 
have a certificate granted by the state or province in cation units (CEUs) through professional readings, 



Chapter 10] Becoming a Physical Activity Professional 253 i 

conferences, or trainings to maintain currency and advertise their competencies accurately, defines the 
expertise. nature of the relationship that should exist between 

Operating on a less-than-adequate knowledge clients and professionals and between subordinates 
base is not the only way in which professionals and professionals, and clarifies matters involving 
breach standards of conduct; they can also be financial transactions with clients. Professionals 
sanctioned for unethical behavior in the workplace. and scientists have also begun to use social media 
Unethical conduct occurs when a professional's to promote discussion and application of knowl- 
behavior at the worksite conflicts with generally edge. This too requires careful use of the highest 
accepted standards of practice in the field. To professional and ethical standards. 
ensure that members clearly understand ethical The sidebar titled Professional Codes of Ethics 
expectations, professional organizations often pub- summarizes elements that are representative of 
lish codes of ethical principles and standards. most ethical guidelines in kinesiology-related 
The primary objective of such codes is to protect professions. Every professional association has a 
the rights of students, clients, and patients. A code code of ethics that, in most cases, is available on 
typically instructs professionals to describe and its website. 

Professional Codes of Ethics 

Ethics is a branch of philosophy that focuses on defining and defending norms of morality (right and 
wrong). So professional codes of ethics are the personal and group beliefs and the standards of 
membership and practice that govern a profession. The number of these shared beliefs varies by 
profession. Much of the variation comes from principles that may overlap; for example, protecting 
clients from harm might stand alone or be part of valuing laws or other values of a profession. 
Some of the typical principles in these codes include the following: 

>» Honesty—telling the truth and avoiding lying, cheating, and theft 

>» Respect—respecting the rights, dignity, and autonomy of all clients 

>» Responsibility—engaging in behaviors such as evidence-based practice, continuing education 
and licensure, protecting confidentiality, and Supporting research and the profession 

>» Protection—protecting the profession, clients, and the public from unethical, immoral, unsup- 
ported, discriminatory, or other harmful behavior 

» Accountability—adhering to professional standards and laws that regulate scope of practice 

>» Promotion—actively participating in and promoting individual and public good (e.g., through 
pro bono service) 

Look up and compare professional codes of ethics for kinesiology-related careers in medicine 
and allied health, education and exercise science, and public health that are related to your career 
interests. Following are some examples and places to start: 

Athletic trainer: nata.org 

Occupational! therapist: aota.org 

Physical therapist: apta.org 

Adult fitness: acsm.org 

Clinical exercise physiologist: acsm-cepa.org 

Coaching (youth): nays.org 

Kinesiotherapist: akta.org 

Physical educator: nea.org 

Sport management: nassm.com 

Strength and conditioning: nsca.com 

Public health education: sophe.org 



ma 254 Introduction to Kinesiology 

&eKEY POIND:e=2 e Adhering to Standards 
Professionals have a stake in maintaining standards of of Professional Subculture 
conduct for all practitioners in their profession. To do Although professionals work in a variety of differ- 
so, professional organizations provide members with ent locales and contexts, they tend to hold high 
opportunities for continuing education and publish expectations for how members of the profession 
guidelines specifying acceptable and unacceptable present themselves and relate to others. For exam- 
conduct. ple, professionals emphasize respect and politeness 

not only to those they serve but to colleagues 
as well. Professionals tend to be well organized 

To ensure that members understand the prevail- in their work, are not clock watchers, and don’t 
ing code of conduct and are competent to imple- hesitate to work extra hours when required. They 
ment safe and effective practice, a profession may dress according to accepted occupational standards 
license its members. A license constitutes formal and attend to matters of personal grooming and 
authority granted by law to practice a profession. hygiene. A sport program director who comes to 
Professions that require licenses can suspend a pro- a board meeting in dirty and disheveled clothes, 
fessional’s license for various types of infractions, a cardiac rehabilitation technician who forgets to 
effectively terminating the professional’s authority wear her lab coat, a physical education instructor 
to practice. who teaches classes in street clothes—these indi- 

Although the medical and legal professions have viduals are not dressed professionally. Likewise, 
made effective use of licensing provisions to control a physical therapist who never combs or brushes 
the quality of professional services, some physical his hair, a personal trainer who smells of body 
activity professions do not require a license (e.g., odor—both are guilty of presenting themselves in 
coaching, fitness training). Several exceptions that an unprofessional manner. These general expecta- 
require licensure are medical and allied health tions apply to professionals in any field. 
professions (e.g., athletic trainer, clinical exercise In addition, physical activity professionals often 
physiologist, physical therapist, occupational ther- face a more specific set of expectations. For exam- 
apist) and physical education teaching. In Canada, ple, fitness leaders and physical education teach- 
some provinces are licensing kinesiologists to pro- ers may be expected to model a physically active 
vide health-related physical activity prescriptions life, refrain from smoking, and maintain a level of 
beyond any acute rehabilitation treatment provided 

fitness appropriate for their age. A long-running 
by physiotherapy (physical therapy). 

philosophical debate in physical education teacher 
The lack of licensing for some physical activ- 

education (PETE) programs has been whether 
ity professions doesn’t mean that unethical or 

majors should be required to meet minimal fitness 
improper conduct by physical activity professionals 

standards (e.g., Blackshear et al., 2019; Cardinal, 
goes unpunished. Usually, local entities administer 

2001; Melville & Jones, 1990). How credible are 
appropriate sanctions at the local workplace, often 

physical activity professionals who don’t practice 
in consultation with a professional organization. 

in their own lives what they recommend for others? 
For example, a local school board may terminate 

Certain physical activity professions are likely 
a schoolteacher whose conduct violates ethical 

to require unique types of knowledge, employ 
codes, and a university may fire a conditioning 

different types of skills, operate according to 
coach who administers illegal anabolic steroids 

certain standards and codes of conduct, require 
to athletes. Similarly, although the American Col- 

specialized language and terminology, require 
lege of Sports Medicine (ACSM) cannot suspend 

specific certification and continuing education 
a cardiac rehabilitation therapist whose conduct 

procedures, and often involve certain types of dress 
puts a client at risk, the clinic director or other 

and on-the-job conduct. One who learns to adapt 
supervisor at the worksite may decide to terminate 

to these profession-specific expectations is said to 
the worker’s employment after consulting ACSM 

have been socialized into the profession. In other 
guidelines. A lack of strong references from pre- 

words, the person has learned to adhere to the 
vious employers, or an absence of references, is a 

roles and responsibilities of the workplace. The 
clear signal of potential problems in professional or 

degree to which a professional has been socialized 
ethical service that most recruiters and employers 

into the professional role is reflected in the ease, 
pay attention to. 

confidence, and efficiency with which he or she 



Chapter 10| Becoming a Physical Activity Professional 255 Zz 

Are All Fitness Instructors Professionals? 

Researchers who examined the fitness knowledge of a random sample of 115 health and fitness 
“professionals” in the areas of nutrition, health screening, testing protocols, exercise prescription, 
and general training knowledge for special populations found that 70 percent of them did not 
have a degree in a field related to exercise science (Malek et al., 2002). Those who did not have 
a degree scored 30 percent lower on the test than those who had a degree. Strong predictors 
of knowledge included a bachelor’s degree in kinesiology or exercise science and certification by 
either ACSM or the National Strength and Conditioning Association (NSCA), as opposed to other 
certifications; in contrast, knowledge was not related to years of experience as a fitness instructor. 
The researchers argued that “these findings suggest that personal fitness trainers should have 
licensing requirements, such as a bachelor's degree in exercise science and certification by an 
organization whose criteria are extensive and widely accepted, before being allowed to practice 
their craft” (p. 19). 

This study was conducted in 2002, and there is reason to believe that the preparation of 
fitness instructors may have improved in recent years. However, the nature of the qualifications 
possessed by fitness workers continues to be an issue. Certification in fitness instruction is 
reportedly now offered by more than 100 organizations, many of which require little more than a 
short online experience or weekend workshop. The most respected fitness certifications are still 
those awarded by ACSM and NSCA. 

performs daily activities and communicates with PEP ON [ees oe ee eee ee 
clients and co-workers. 

Mechanical, market-driven professionals value the 
The sooner you become socialized into your 

profession, profit, personal prestige, and status over 
profession, the more valuable you will be to an 

the rights and needs of clients. Social trustee, civic 
employer. For that reason, students in professional 
programs are increasingly seeking opportunities professionals value clients and the social good more 

to volunteer at clinics, YMCAs, schools, and com- than themselves or their profession. 

munity agencies. Although usually not counted 
as course work, such extracurricular experiences 
and service can give you a head start in learning Mechanical, Market-Driven 
how to assume professional roles and can provide Professionalism 
you with valuable references in the field. Similar 

Mechanical, market-driven professionals tend to be 
growth and leadership opportunities are available 

so focused on their own professional aspirations 
in student major clubs, athletics, student govern- 

that they lose sight of their clients’ needs and 
ment organizations, and other on-campus activities. 

desires. In many cases, the work of these profes- 
sionals becomes its own justification, valued by 

How Do Our Values Shape Our them and their colleagues regardless of whether it 
provides any real benefits to society. Medical and 

Professional Conduct? law professions are sometimes accused of this type 

Hal Lawson (1998a) described two value orienta- of professionalism, but some of the physical activity 

tions that may characterize professionals in any professions can be guilty of it, too. 
Mechanical, market-driven professionals are 

field—mechanical, market-driven profession- 
alism and social trustee, civic professionalism. likely to serve their clients in a fragmented, com- 

partmentalized fashion. That is, these professionals 
These orientations are ideal types, which is to say 

that most professionals don’t fit completely into view their professional contributions within the 
strict limits of their specialization and ignore the 

one category or the other, but they can serve as 
variety of relevant forces acting on the client, such 

reference points that help you determine how you 

want to operate as a professional. as family disintegration, illness, or drug or alcohol 



MM 256 Introduction to Kinesiology 

dependency. Such professionals may dismiss these of a profession is measured by its effectiveness 

other problems as “somebody else’s responsibility” in promoting the social welfare, enhancing social 

and never go out of their way to see that proper and economic development and democracy, and 

referrals are made. They may treat clients humanely ensuring social responsibility and social justice. 

but with little feeling, believing instead that an The actions of a social trustee, civic professional 

objective, arm’s-length attitude is critical to pro- are guided not by a fascination with technology and 

fessional success. technique or by a concern for status and prestige 

Mechanical, market-driven professionals also but by a vision of the good and just society. They 

are likely to devote much time to enhancing their operate according to this rule: “Healthy people and 
status and competing with other professionals, a good society first, me and my profession second 

even if it means sacrificing the quality of service in service of this greater good” (Lawson, 1998a, p. 
they give to their clients. They pride themselves 7). They recognize that clients live in a multiplicity 
on their expertise, view themselves as superior to of worlds (e.g., work, school, family, church), and 

those they serve, and often encourage clients to they understand the ways in which worlds can 
develop a dependency on them and their services. interact to affect their clients’ lives. 

Because of this recognition, these profession- 

Social Trustee, Civic Professionalism als often work in teams with other specialists to 
achieve desirable goals. They make no pretense 

Social trustee, civic professionals hold to a much about being totally objective in their relationships 
different set of values. They believe that the worth with clients. Their professional practices reflect 

How Does Your Personality Match Up With Your Career? 

Career counselors often use occupational attitude inventories to determine the best matches 
between someone's abilities and personality and their possible career choices. Many of these 
tests are based on researcher John Holland’s six vocational personalities and work environments. 

> Realistic personality: Values practical and mechanical experiences such as operating machines 
or farming. Does not enjoy social interaction and would not enjoy teaching. Possible careers 
include firefighting, electrical work, or carpentry. Opportunities are limited in the field of 
kinesiology. 

Investigative personality: Skilled at understanding and analyzing science and math problems. 
Not usually leaders or salespersons; more comfortable in laboratory environments. Those 
who pursue careers in kinesiology as researchers in exercise physiology, biomechanics, sport 
psychology, or sport sociology might have investigative personalities. 

Artistic personality: Enjoys creative activities such as art, drama, crafts, dance, music, or cre- 
ative writing. Best suited to work as writer, actor, artist, graphic designer, musician, or dancer. 

Social personality: Enjoys helping people; values friendliness and trustworthiness in others. 
Tends to excel in careers such as nursing, counseling, physical therapy, and medicine. Socially 
oriented individuals often pursue careers in athletic training and sport medicine. 

Enterprising personality: Ambitious, energetic, and sociable. Tends to be a self-starter who 
enjoys being in charge. Less interested in analyzing or conducting scientific studies than in 
getting something practical accomplished. Often pursues a career in business or politics. 
Managers of fitness facilities, coaches, and school principals often have enterprising per- 
sonalities. 

Conventional personality: Likes to work with numbers, machines, facts, and records. Prefers 
highly structured, orderly work that follows a set plan. Often is a bookkeeper, bank teller, or 
clerk. Most careers in kinesiology are not compatible with this type. 

Which personality type do you think best describes you? What careers in kinesiology do you 
believe your personality best matches? 

Reproduced by special permission of the publisher, Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc. 16204 North Florida Avenue, Lutz, FL 33549, from 
Making Vocational Choices, Third Edition, Copyright 1973, 1985, 1992, 1997 by Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc. All rights reserved. 



Chapter 10] Becoming a Physical Activity Professional 257 

their personal values. They don’t view clients as The best professional preparation programs immerse 
dependent on them; instead, they believe that pro- students in all of these types of academic experiences. 
fessional-client interaction can be a mutual growth 
experience in which each benefits from the other’s 

Course Work in Liberal Arts and Sciences 
knowledge and skill. 

(General Education Requirements) 
All college graduates, regardless of their career 

How Are Physical Activity Professionals aspirations, are assumed to be educated people. 

Educated for the Workforce? Used in this sense, the word educated describes 
someone who has struggled with the great works 

By now you are aware that professional work of literature, learned something about the histori- 
requires advanced knowledge that you can obtain cal development of human civilization, developed 
only through formal education at the undergradu- critical skills essential for analyzing arguments 
ate and graduate levels. If you’re like most college logically, learned how to determine the truthfulness 
students, however, you may not always understand of ideas and identify the values embedded in them, 
why certain courses are required or what the developed sufficient knowledge about the arts to 
purposes are of various phases of the curriculum. appreciate the richness that they can add to one’s 
You may be interested to learn that kinesiologists life, and developed insights into the problems and 
themselves constantly debate the structure of the prospects of their own and other cultures. Accom- 
kinesiology curriculum. Although the curriculum at plishing this goal requires one to take courses in 
your institution may not be an exact replica of the science, philosophy, history, literature, sociology, 
curriculum described here, it is probably similar mathematics, art, music, and the dramatic arts, 
in its general features. The kinesiology curriculum among other subjects. These courses are usually 
model incorporates five general types of academic part of the “general education” or liberal studies 
experiences that are essential in preparing kinesi- requirements in college and are taken during the 
ologists for their professional roles: first 2 years of undergraduate study. They form 

* Course work in liberal arts and sciences the foundation for your professional education, 
which usually comes later. In kinesiology, the 

* Course work in physical activity 
major gateway courses are anatomy and physiol- 

e Course work in theoretical and applied the- ogy (Vitali et al., 2020), and performance in these 
oretical knowledge in kinesiology courses is significantly related to performance in 

* Course work in professional practice knowl- majors’ courses (Esmat & Pitts, 2020). These GE 
edge and skills for particular professions requirements in kinesiology degrees are important 

¢ Apprenticeship or internship experience at for success and admission to competitive graduate 

a worksite and professional programs. 

So You Want to Become an Expert in Your Field? 7 

According to a survey by Eagan and colleagues (2015), 60 percent of your classmates are deter- 
mined to become authorities or experts in their chosen fields. Being an expert means that you 
have mastered an area of knowledge, a set of skills, or both to such a high level that you are 
recognized as an authority by your colleagues and clients. This is easier said than done. Here, in 
a nutshell, is some advice offered by scholars who have spent their careers studying expertise: 

Consistently and overwhelmingly, the evidence . . . [nas shown] that experts are always 
made, not born. These conclusions are based on rigorous research that looked at excep- 
tional performance using scientific methods that are verifiable and reproducible. .. . The 
development of genuine expertise requires struggle, sacrifice, and honest, often painful 

self-assessment. There are no shortcuts. It will take you at least a decade to achieve 

expertise, and you will need to invest that time wisely, by engaging in “deliberate” prac- 

tice—practice that focuses on tasks beyond your current level of competence and comfort 

(Ericsson et al., 2007, p. 116). Experts in professional careers continue this commitment 

to professional development throughout their careers. 



BEM 258 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Liberal education derives its name from a sense What types of books will you read? What kinds of 

of freedom: Only by immersing yourself in the arts music will you listen to? How will you speak and 

and sciences can you liberate, or free, yourself from write? Will your analysis of the claims of politicians 

dependence on the thinking of others or the past. and other public figures be logical and based in 
Liberally educated people develop a capacity for fact? Your approach to these and hundreds of other 
seeking the truth and making intelligent choices life experiences should bear witness to the fact that 
when they confront life’s problems and opportu- you are a liberally educated person. Of course, a lib- 
nities. They also understand that nobody is ever eral education should also have short-term effects. 
completely educated—that everyone is always in The most important effect is to provide you with 
the process of becoming educated. Thus, these the broad-based knowledge and intellectual skills 
people are aware of what they do not know, and essential for undertaking more advanced study in 
they continually seek opportunities to expand their your professional curriculum. A liberal education 
intellectual and cultural horizons by reading books frees you from depending on others to do your 
and newspapers, attending concerts, patronizing thinking for you. Thus, it provides the foundation 
the arts, and engaging in other lifelong educational on which all other educational experiences are 
activities. constructed. 

Thus, the liberal education you receive in college 
is just the beginning. Whether this initial immersion Course Work in Physical Activity 
in the liberal arts and sciences accomplishes its 
purpose will be reflected in your level of interest Most kinesiology departments require their majors 

in continuing to educate yourself after graduation. to enroll in physical activity courses, either as part of 

Kinesiology Colleagues 

Jan and Terry Todd 
Since they joined the kine- 
siology faculty at the Uni- 
versity of Texas at Austin in 
1983, Terry and Jan Todd 
have pursued the goal of 
preserving the history of 
physical culture. Both are 
former lifting champions 
who set national and 
world records. Now they 
have established what 
historians have labeled 
the single most import- 
ant archive in the world 
on the topic. The archive 
contains an estimated 
25,000 volumes and 
some 200,000 mag- 
azines and journals, Co J. Lutcher Stark 
along with pamphlets, 
clippings, photographs, and training equipment. Thanks 
to generous gifts from benefactors, the collection is housed in a beautiful, 27,000-square-foot 
structure on the Texas campus and is open to scholars and members of the public investigating 
historical issues related to physical culture. Named the H.J. Lutcher Stark Center for Physical 
Culture and Sports, the facility also houses a museum and serves as an excellent example of 
how kinesiology can be integrated with the liberal arts. 



Chapter 10| Becoming a Physical Activity Professional 259 

A liberal education expands your approach to physical activity by incorporating the totality of your personal experiences. 

Peoplelmages/E+/Getty Images 

their liberal education requirements or in conjunction persuasive critic of the performances of others. You 
with their professional programs. As noted in part should also be able to play your role more astutely 
I, you entered college with a wealth of experiential in planning and preparing for your own physical 
knowledge about physical activity and no doubt activity experiences. Finally, you should be able to 
found it to be a vehicle for learning much about draw connections between your physical activity 
yourself, others, and the world around you. However, experiences and the world around you. 
the physical activity experiences offered within the 
framework of a liberal or professional education 
should result in qualitatively richer experiences than REE OLN [wet eres eee eee eee 
the experiences you had before you came to college. College courses in physical activities are often taken in 
Let’s take a moment to consider how physical activity conjunction with liberal studies and form an essential 
courses at the college level might affect you. part of professional preparation in kinesiology. 

If you’ve already taken a physical activity course 
at your college, you may have discovered that the 
course was more intense and taught at a more For instance, a course in martial arts should 

advanced level than were your classes in high attune you to the nuances of pace, tempo, and 

school. Moreover, everything we learn occurs in the rhythm; similarly, a course in fencing should foster 

context of all of our personal experiences. Thus, as an appreciation of beauty, force, and form in move- 

your liberal education continues to expand your ment. Your course work in physical activity may 

horizons, your approach to physical activity expe- also sensitize you to ethical and moral questions 

riences will change as well. You should be a more that you might not have noticed before you were 

intelligent analyst of your performances and a more exposed to a liberal education. 



Mg 260 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Physical activity courses are also required as to professional work any more than should other 

part of your kinesiology major. This requirement liberal studies, such as poetry and medieval history. 

may seem immediately reasonable to you if you This view is not shared by all kinesiology profes- 
plan a career in teaching, coaching, or fitness lead- sors. To the contrary, some believe that kinesiology 

ership. However, why does it exist for students in is better understood as an applied professional 

sport administration, pre-rehabilitation sciences, field and that its best justification to the world rests 
and other professions in which physical activity on the fact that it prepares people for jobs in the 
performance is not among the professional respon- field of physical activity. A detailed discussion of 
sibilities? If you’re struggling with this question, this debate lies beyond the scope of this textbook, 
think about the general model of physical activity so let us just say simply that it is probably not an 
described in chapter 1, which recognizes that either—or matter. 
knowledge gained through physical activity pro- Figure 10.3 shows that theoretical kinesiology 
vides one of the three legs of the stool on which involves knowledge of physical activity with roots 
the discipline of kinesiology rests. Whatever career in the traditional parent disciplines in the human- 
you enter, performance of physical activity will be ities; the biological, behavioral, and sociological 
at center stage, and you should therefore acquire a 
wealth of firsthand physical activity experiences— 

Theoretical kinesiology 
not only to help you identify and empathize with 
physical activity problems confronted by your 

¢”( N|] p hSyosciicaoll ogy ofclients, but also to broaden and enrich your com-  
activity HY 

prehensive understanding of the phenomenon of 
physical activity. Many kinesiology professions 
also require good physical fitness so that one can | exercise 
perform job-related physical tasks without injury psychology 
over the course of their career. 

"Philosophy of 
Course Work in Theoretical Kinesiology | physical activity 

Part II of this text gives you a general overview of 
the subdisciplines of kinesiology. Courses in these 
subdisciplines teach theoretical knowledge not 
only about sport and fitness but also about physical 
activity in general. Much of this knowledge can be 
applied to professional practice. For example, theo- 
retical knowledge about how the body responds to 
exercise (drawn from the subdiscipline of physiol- 
ogy of physical activity) can be directly applicable 
to the work of a swimming coach or a cardiac 
rehabilitation specialist. Other types of theoretical 
knowledge may at first seem less applicable on the 
job, but over time, it may profoundly affect how a 
professional thinks and acts. 

Some professors would argue that students 
should not expect all theoretical knowledge in 
kinesiology to immediately apply to specific 
careers, just as theoretical knowledge in literature, 
philosophy, biology, and physics should not be 
expected to directly equip students with occupa- 
tional skills. These professors would claim that the 
value of theoretical knowledge lies in its power to 
sharpen students’ perspectives on themselves and 
the world around them and to help them develop GETS] Much theoretical knowledge in kinesi- 
new, critical, and creative ways of thinking. Thus, ology is derived from parent disciplines. What new 
some would say that a “discipline” of kinesiology subdisciplines do you think will grow in the kinesiology 
(theoretical kinesiology) should not directly apply of the future? 



Chapter 10| Becoming a Physical Activity Professional 

studies; and the arts. Theoretical knowledge in it seems only logical to expect students who are 
kinesiology builds on these foundational areas by earning a degree in a given field to master at least 
relating each to the emerging body of knowledge a general level of knowledge about that field. In 
about physical activity. The result is a diverse, addition, the wisdom of history, philosophy, and 
stimulating body of knowledge for students who sociology of physical activity is relevant to kine- 
plan to enter the physical activity professions. At siology professionals when they face changes in 
present, this body of knowledge is represented fitness fads, inconsistent research results, politics, 
by specific courses in exercise physiology, motor and other forces that affect their practice. 
behavior, and so on. The important challenge for Another argument for requiring students to 
kinesiologists is to integrate this knowledge in the master theoretical kinesiology is to ensure that 
way that practitioners must do in order to make people who work in the field are united around a 
decisions in their work. common core of physical activity theory—for exam- 

The evolution of theoretical knowledge of kine- ple, the American Kinesiology Association core 
siology has been an exciting development in the described in chapter 1. Without such a core, kinesi- 
field of physical activity, but questions continue to ology might fragment into a number of completely 
surface about how much of this knowledge should different fields. Those who believe that all physical 
be required of students embarking on careers in activity professionals should be required to study 
the professions. Should future athletic trainers, theoretical kinesiology also argue that doing so 
physical education teachers, and aquatic therapists may benefit future professionals in ways that we do 
be expected to master the entire body of knowl- not yet fully understand. Just as a liberal education 
edge of kinesiology? Similarly, sport management alters students’ ways of approaching problems and 
majors may well ask why they must take courses in opportunities in their lives, so an immersion in the 
exercise physiology or biomechanics. Students who theoretical knowledge of kinesiology may equip 
plan to be conditioning coaches may ask why they physical activity professionals with general con- 
should be expected to know about the history and cepts and ways of thinking about physical activity 
philosophy of sport, especially when the concepts that will help them solve the myriad problems they 
may seem not to apply to the professional problems will face in professional practice. 
that they will face in the workplace. Most undergraduate programs in kinesiology 

In fact, a good case can be made for requiring require students to take core courses in kinesiology 
all undergraduate kinesiology majors, regardless of theory regardless of their career aspirations; these 
their career aspirations, to learn the body of knowl- courses may vary from institution to institution. 
edge of kinesiology (Newell, 1990). For starters, The American Kinesiology Association has recom- 

Professional Issues in Kinesiology | 

Integrating Kinesiology Subdisciplinary Knowledge 
Kinesiology professionals often need knowledge from many subdisciplines to help people to be 
more physically active. Most people know they should be physically active and exercise regularly, 
but, as with eating their vegetables and practicing other healthy habits (more sleep, less sedentary 
TV or screen time), many find it difficult to follow through. Given this reality, most kinesiology pro- 
fessionals should, as part of their work, integrate research evidence from psychology and sociol- 
ogy to help motivate people to be physically active and sustain an active lifestyle. It’s not enough 
to simply have the research documenting physical activity’s unique and significant benefits; the 
field and its professionals must continue researching how to implement programs and motivate 
clients in the real world.t The most applied research on implementing programs in the messy and 

complex real world and at the whole-population level is sometimes called translational research. 

Thus, professionals must be committed to continuous learning in relation to all evidence related 

to their practice—nojuts t the topics they find interesting or initially think are most important. 

Citation style: AMA . 

1. Segar ML, Guerin E, Phillips E, Fortier M. From vital sign to vitality: Selling exercise so patients want to 

buy it. Curr Sports Med Rep. 2016;15(4):276-281. 



MG 262 Introdu ction to Kinesiology 

Becoming Familiar With Your Academic Program 

Do you know what core courses in your kinesiology department are required of all kinesiology or 

exercise science majors? Does the core requirement differ for different career tracks? Why are 

these courses required? Do some courses have prerequisites? Are students in your department 

required to enroll in physical activity classes? Why, or why not? Are you required to complete an 

internship (or student teaching) as part of your degree requirements? Again, why, or why not? 

How does a student in your program apply for an internship placement? Does the internship have 

prerequisites? Must you maintain a minimum grade point average in order to enroll in higher-level 

courses? If so, what is it? 
One barometer of students’ depth of engagement in their field of study is their familiarity with 

the requirements of the academic program in which they are enrolled. If you aren’t familiar with the 
requirements of your program, consult the bulletin or catalog for your institution that lists courses 
required in your major. Faculty or academic advisors are good sources of information on making 
the most of any flexibility in your degree program. This is particularly important in preparing for 
admission to graduate programs that usually have specific course expectations. 

mended that all programs offer core course work training sessions, or selecting the types of balls 
in four areas (American Kinesiology Association, and bats to use in order to speed the learning of 
2003): children with disabilities. 

Unlike kinesiology theory, practice theories and 
¢ Physical activity in health, wellness, and 

the skills of professional practice cannot be mas- 
quality of life 

tered simply by studying them; they are learned 
¢ Scientific foundations of physical activity through action. Students acquire these theories and 
¢ Cultural, historical, and philosophical skills by participating in hands-on practical expe- 

dimensions of physical activity riences centered on solving real-life professional 

e The practice of physical activity problems. You can learn about administering a 
stress test by reading a book, but you learn how to 

Do the core requirements in your department fit administer a stress test only by following up your 
this general scheme? reading with practical experience. By committing 

errors and receiving instructive feedback from 
Course Work in Professional Practice your professors and clinical supervisors, you will 

Knowledge and Professional Skills gradually develop and sharpen your command of 
professional practice knowledge. 

Your preparation as a professional wouldn’t be 
complete if you didn’t acquire the professional 
practice knowledge essential for success in your OeO ee 
career. Whereas theories of kinesiology tend to 

Disciplinary knowledge alone does not equip you to 
focus on physical activity alone, mastering profes- 

perform the tasks required in your chosen profession. 
sional practices requires knowledge that will help 
you identify clients’ needs and desires, analyze You develop the necessary competencies through 

impediments to meeting these needs and desires, course work that provides you with practice in per- 

and implement actions appropriate to the context forming these skills. 

and other relevant factors. Professional practice 
knowledge is incorporated into practice theories, 

These initial attempts at putting practice theory 
which are developed through applied research and 

into professional practice will probably occur in 
professional experience. A practice theory may, for 

somewhat smaller classes, in which your perfor- 
example, guide a professional in selecting the best 

mance will be evaluated more intensely than 
way to perform cardiovascular tests on an elderly it 

might have been in introductory courses 
person at a nursing home with limited equipment, in kine- 

siology theory. In these courses, your classmates 
determining how to motivate a soccer player who is 

or mannequins may serve as 
having academic difficulties and misses off-season simulated clients; 



Chapter 10| Becoming a Physical Activity Professional 263 iz 

therefore, your initial attempts to perform profes- experience of the undergraduate years—and the 
sional tasks will occur in the safe environment of most enjoyable. For these reasons, most students 
the classroom, where your mistakes will not lead feel that it is the most valuable experience of their 
to serious consequences. If you perform up to undergraduate education. 
departmental standards in these courses, you will An internship differs from traditional course 
be permitted to enter the final stage of your profes- work in three ways. First, it occurs at a worksite 
sional education: field experiences, or internships. rather than at the college or university. This 

arrangement means that your conduct is dictated 

Internships by the subculture of the worksite rather than by 
the subculture of your undergraduate department. 

An apprentice learns how to perform a job by 
Thus, you will be evaluated not only on the knowl- 

working closely with an experienced worker. An 
edge and skills you display but also on how well 

apprentice usually assists a veteran for little or no 
you conform to the rules of the workplace in which 

pay in return for the opportunity to learn the skills 
you are acting as an intern. For example, if you 

required in order to enter the full-time workforce. 
were engaged in an athletic training internship 

The term apprentice is used most commonly in 
for a Division I athletic department, you would 

connection with crafts or trades (e.g., plumb- 
need to pay attention to the local rules that govern 

ing, electrical contracting, carpentry) in which 
behavior in the training room. Are dress codes 

apprenticeship is the only type of training offered strictly enforced? Does the supervisor of the train- 
for the job. In professional education programs, ing room expect you to arrive 15 minutes before 
the apprenticeship phase is referred to as field your scheduled starting time? What local terms or 
experience or internship, and it constitutes the 

abbreviations are used to describe interventions, 
culminating experience of 4 years of study. Unlike locations, or procedures? What safety measures are 
apprenticeships for crafts or trades, internships for you expected to follow? What are the established 
professional careers are preceded by a rigorous emergency procedures? Does the supervisor want 
course of study. interns to show initiative, or does she prefer that 

you ask for advice or permission before taking 
action? You must consider these and other such 

ASU at] Ue, 0 ee 
issues in order to ensure success in the internship 

For professionals, an internship constitutes the cul- as well as in the profession. 
minating educational experience, in which they apply A second way in which an internship differs 
knowledge and skills under the supervision of a trained from your regular course work is that your per- 
professional. An internship is also an evaluative expe- formance will be supervised on a day-to-day basis 

rience that tests your preparedness. by an experienced professional who is probably 
not a member of the faculty in your department. 
A university supervisor may occasionally visit 

In the physical activity professions, an internship the internship site, but the primary overseer and 
may be known by any of a variety of names. The evaluator of your work will be the professional to 
term internship may be used in sport management whom you are assigned. Faculty members choose 
and fitness instructor programs, whereas student these on-site supervisors, or preceptors, because 
teaching may be used in physical education teacher they are considered to be good role models for 
education programs, and clinical training may future professionals. However, you should not 
be used in athletic training programs. Regardless be surprised if their opinions, philosophies, and 
of what it is called, the experience serves two methods of operation differ from those that you 
purposes: have learned in your professional course work. 

Exposure to a variety of philosophies and methods 
¢ Teaching you how to apply the knowledge 

usually expands your knowledge of the profession. 
and skills you have learned in your profes- 

Always consider internship placements endorsed 
sional program to a real-life situation 

by your university supervisors or faculty before 
¢ Testing your level of preparedness to enter seeking approval for placements of convenience or 

professional practice mentors and organizations of unknown excellence. 

For most students, this is the first opportunity to The third way in which an internship differs 

assume the role of a member of their chosen profes- from typical course work is that you will be serv- 

sion. The internship usually is the most challenging ing real, not simulated, clients. Therefore, your 



mm 264 Introduction to Kinesiology 

An internship provides real-world experience, which can help you decide to continue your course of study. 

Linda Davidson / The Washington Post via Getty Images 

actions will carry important consequences, which an entire semester of full days in which you assume 
can be serious. Serving real clients also means major responsibility for teaching classes. If you are 
that you must learn the social graces expected of a physical education intern (.e., a student teacher), 
a professional. You will need to demonstrate poise, you will be responsible for logging a preestablished 
courtesy, alertness, and initiative, even when clients number of hours specified by your department and 
are not easy to serve. You will also be expected the state education department. 
to demonstrate a level of confidence that makes 
clients feel comfortable and encourages them to 
place their trust in you. Are You Suited for a Career in the 

Internship requirements vary across institu- Physical Activity Professions? 
tions and professional specializations. If you are 
studying sport management, your internship may Now that you know something about the types 

involve a semester of 20-hour weeks working in of work that professionals do and the educational 

an athletic administration office, where you might experiences required to prepare you for such work, 
be required (like most professionals) to perform a it’s time to ask yourself how well suited you are for 

range of duties, including mundane tasks such as a career in the physical activity professions. 

handling mailings in the ticket office or answering 
the phone in the information office. You will also Do My Attitudes, Values, and Goals Match 
be given measured amounts of responsibility in Those of Professionals? 
performing the types of tasks that will be required 
of you as a sport management professional. If you The first step is to consider how compatible you 

are undertaking a student teaching experience in are with professional work in general, regardless of 

physical education, you may be required to spend the particular field. Approach this task honestly and 



Chapter 10| Becoming a Physical Activity Professional 

objectively. If you decide that you’re not well suited educational standards for professional practice 
to professional life, consider alternative careers. usually increase over time, undergraduate students 

In this step, take stock of your strengths, weak- will increasingly discover that a master’s degree has 
nesses, and potential in relation to the personal become the minimal educational qualification for 
attributes and preferences likely to be required in entering many of the physical activity professions. 
most types of professional work. Nobody is in a Another good sign appeared in the fact that a 
better position to judge our attitudes, attributes, and relatively large percentage (88 percent) of first- 
preferences than we ourselves are, but sometimes year students indicated that they had performed 
our self-perceptions can be a bit clouded. One way volunteer work in the previous year. It is troubling, 
to bring our own attitudes into sharper focus is to however, that only 37 percent plan to continue 
compare them with those of our friends and peers. volunteering or doing community service work in 
To this end, you can find a convenient template college. A student who is not interested in volunteer 
for assessing your own attributes and preferences work may not be well suited for a career in the pro- 
in the results of a survey, conducted by the Higher fessions, given that a spirit of service is the lifeblood 
Education Research Institute at UCLA, of more than of professional work. On a more pragmatic note, 
140,000 students entering 4-year institutions in the employers and graduate school admissions officers 
United States in 2015 (Eagan et al., 2015). usually view continuing commitment to volunteer 

Here are some results from the survey. If you are work throughout college, even if only for 2 or 3 
a typical undergraduate student, chances are that hours per week, as an indication that an applicant 
you have already identified a career track (only 14 understands the serious service responsibilities that 
percent said they have not) and enrolled in college come with a career in the helping professions. 
in order to gain a general education and apprecia- About one-third of students (approximately 34 
tion of ideas (72 percent) and “get a better job” (85 percent) reported feeling overwhelmed by all of 
percent). This is a good start for future professionals, their obligations during their high school years, 
and the survey also included some encouraging but professionals in the workforce sometimes feel 
signs that incoming college students are becoming this way too. Thus, stamina and robust health are 
more serious about their academic performance. especially important personal attributes for phys- 
For example, 22 percent of students in the survey ical activity professionals. Yet the survey results 
reported spending 6 to 10 hours per week studying indicated that only 53 percent of respondents 
or doing homework in high school—a trend that has exercised or played a sport more than 6 hours per 
been on the rise since 2005. (Expect to do a lot more week. On a positive note, it is quite likely that the 
than this in college!) An upward trend was also seen percentage of students who plan to engage in sport 
in the percentage of first-year college students (70 and exercise is much higher among the subset of 
percent) who said they frequently took notes during students who plan to major in kinesiology. 
class as high school seniors, whereas a decrease was After giving the matter some thought, you may 
reported in the percentage of students (34 percent) have concluded that you really aren’t cut out for a 
who reported being frequently bored during class. professional career. Perhaps you don’t find working 
In another good sign, 54 percent said there was a with people attractive, don’t particularly like helping 
good chance that they would discuss course content to solve other people’s problems, or would rather 
outside of class. work for a supervisor than take responsibility for 

The survey also raised some red flags. For acting on your own authority. Maybe the prospect 
instance, only 44 percent of students planned to of continually educating yourself to keep abreast of 
communicate regularly with their professors, and the professional literature or attending to the ethical 
only 54 percent planned to become involved in ramifications of your work behavior is not part of 
clubs or other campus activities. In contrast, such the vision you have for your career. If so, it seems 
forms of engagement are viewed as very important unlikely that a professional career will interest you, 
by most college faculty members. regardless of the area of specialization. We suggest 

On a more encouraging note, 75 percent of that you continue to collect more information by 
first-year students planned to pursue graduate reading the other chapters in this section of the 

education. As a rule, advancement in a profession is book, talking with faculty members, and consulting 
linked closely to educational credentials, and high- with the career counseling center on your campus. 

er-paying jobs usually include some administrative What if you are convinced that you would like a 

and supervisory responsibilities. Graduate degrees career in the physical activity professions, but you 

open doors to such career paths. In fact, because recognize that you have a glaring deficiency (e.g., 



fe 266 Introduction to Kinesiology 

fear of speaking before large groups, lack of orga- Do My Attitudes, Interests, and Talents 
nizational skills)? If this is the case, consult with Lend Themselves to a Specific Physical 
your faculty advisor about addressing the weakness 
by including appropriate academic experiences Activity Profession? 
during your undergraduate years. The third step in this personal evaluation is to 

consider whether your attitudes, interests, and 

Am | Interested—Really Interested— talents match the specific characteristics of the 
occupation that you are considering. For example, 

in Physical Activity? 
if you envision a career in therapeutic exercise 

If what you have read about the physical activity or physical therapy, consider whether you enjoy 
professions excites you and matches your inter- interacting with people who are sick or injured. 
ests and attitudes, the second step is to consider Of course, most people—even medical students— 
how much you like physical activity. If you’re not require some time before they feel completely 
intrigued by performing, studying, and watching comfortable in medical environments, but you 
physical activity; if you aren’t curious about the need to understand, fairly early on, your degree of 
mysteries of body movement in all of its manifes- comfort with the environments in which medical 
tations (biophysical, behavioral, and sociocultural); and allied health professionals work. 
and if you’re not prepared to apply your intellect If you like being around people who are vig- 
and skills to exploring these mysteries, then you orous, healthy, and active, then you might enjoy 
may be better off selecting another profession. a career in physical fitness counseling, personal 

training, coaching, or athletic training. Or do you 
have a special place in your heart for people with 
disability, such as intellectual disability, autism, 
blindness, and deafness? Would you enjoy the 
challenge of helping such people maximize their 
physical and mental potential? If so, then a reason- 
able goal might be a career in adapted physical 
education. If, on the other hand, you like being 
the center of attention; organizing and speaking 
to large groups; planning, monitoring, and evalu- 
ating activities that others perform; and accepting 
responsibility for the actions of people younger 
than you, then perhaps you would like a career in 
teaching fitness, coaching, or physical education. 

Does working at a desk dressed in business 
attire and adhering to a 9-to-5 workday appeal to 
you? If so, you might be well suited to a career 
in sport management. Are you more attracted to 
fluid and informal working environments in which 
your work schedule might be more flexible, even 
though work might intrude on your weekends and 
evenings? If your answer is yes, then you might be 
suited to a more entrepreneurial professional posi- 
tion, such as personal trainer, professional sport 
instructor, or university professor. More complete 
descriptions of physical activity professions are 
provided in chapters 11 through 15 to help you 
assess which careers may suit you best. 

If you become convinced that your needs, inter- 
ests, and attitudes do not closely match the specific 

Do your professional interests focus on helping a particular professional occupation you had in mind, explore 
population of clients? other career possibilities in the physical activity 
© Human Kinetics professions. If you’re unsure, consider taking 

advantage of opportunities to volunteer at clinics, 



Chapter 10|Becoming a Physical Activity Professional 267 = 

commercial or governmental agencies, schools, or Faculty members in your department will be ready 
other physical activity settings. Volunteering gives and willing to advise you, even if doing so means 
you firsthand experience in various working envi- referring you to other departments or institutions. 
ronments and thus increases the probability that Asking questions about the relevance of your pro- 
the career you choose will match your interests, tal- gram to your life goals is risky business. You may not 
ents, and preferences. If possible, coordinate these like how you answer your own questions! But this vital 
volunteer experiences with your faculty advisor. exercise is one that students too often ignore. Remem- 

ber that those who make effective career decisions 

Will My College or University early in their undergraduate years are more likely to 
enjoy their undergraduate studies and appreciate their 

Program Prepare Me Well? 
relevance, particularly in their major courses. 

The fourth step is to determine whether the pro- 
gram in which you are enrolled will prepare you How Committed Am | to Preparing 
well for your chosen career. If, for example, you are 
most interested in a career in teaching and coaching to Be the Best Professional Possible? 
but your department offers only concentrations in At the first practice of the season, coaches often 
exercise science, sport administration, and health rhetorically ask their teams, “How bad do you 
promotion, then the department’s curriculum would want it?” They refer, of course, to the team’s will- 
seem to be a weak match for your career objectives. ingness to invest the time, energy, and hard work 
The same would be true if the program slanted necessary for winning a championship. So, how 
heavily toward the preparation of physical educa- badly do you want it? How much energy are you 
tion teachers or professionals in the fitness industry, willing to invest in order to succeed in your chosen 
but you were most interested in a career in sport profession? This fifth and last step in the process 
management or exercise science. If you have doubts may be the most important. You may have had 
about the fit between your career aspirations and little difficulty answering the questions up to this 
the course requirements of your program, talk with point, but if you aren’t committed to success, then 
an advisor, faculty member, or the department chair. there’s little point in going through the motions and 

Sometimes students change their career goals paying tuition only to have your career plans end 
after enrolling in an undergraduate program. up on the scrap heap. Are you willing to commit 
Although this would occur less often if students to preparing yourself to be the best professional 
took the five-step approach recommended here, possible? Let’s examine some of the ways in which 
changing career goals during the undergraduate this commitment might be manifested. 
years is common. You should keep in mind that 
switching majors or concentrations within a depart- Excellence in Academic Work 

ment (e.g., from physical education to exercise Graduating with a superb academic record is 
science) can delay your graduation for a year or regarded by most employers as a baseline indica- 
more. If you switch to an entirely new field, you tor of your level of commitment to becoming an 
may push your graduation even farther into the outstanding professional. Of course, some people 
future. Making such a drastic change also requires are more academically gifted than others, but stu- 
you to get socialized into another department, dents can often overcome slight shortcomings in 
become accustomed to new professors, and form academic ability by means of planning and effort. 
new friendships with classmates. Few things make a more indelible impression on 

However inconvenient switching your major professors than a student’s willingness to work 
might be, it is better to endure delays and incon- hard to achieve academic success. Employers will 
venience than to continue training for a career in also appreciate graduates who show evidence of 
which you have little interest. On the other hand, commitment that resulted in academic excellence. 
if you are deep into your undergraduate program 
and find that your career interests have changed to 
another physical activity profession, the best action SNR LON te cr 
may be to complete your present program and then Perhaps the best predictor of your success in the physi- 
pursue a master’s degree in your area of interest. cal activity professions lies in your level of commitment 
Some master’s programs allow strong students from to preparing yourself to be the most knowledgeable 
different undergraduate majors admission if they 

and skilled practitioner possible. 
complete certain disciplinary prerequisite courses. 



mg 268 Introduction to Kinesiology 

What types of behaviors suggest a willingness a student who views courses as obstacles to be 

to work hard? Attending class regularly and on overcome to that of a professional who tries to gain 

time, regularly using the library or its electronic from each course the knowledge and skills that 

resources, asking questions and contributing to will help him or her develop into the best qualified 

class discussions, consistent study throughout the professional possible. When you identify with your 

term, and reading assigned and unassigned jour- chosen profession, you also seek advice from vet- 

nal articles and books about the topics that you eran professionals and observe them in practice; in 

are studying in class—all are signs that you take this way, you begin to establish a communication 

your academic work seriously. In addition, most network with practicing professionals. You also 

professors view students who approach them after establish the habit of reading the journals in your 

class with questions about the day’s material as field. Thus, you learn the language of the field, 

more committed than students who avoid them receive current updates to disciplinary knowledge, 

at all costs. and begin to feel comfortable around experienced 
professionals while still in the preparation phase 

Early Identification With the Professional Field of your career. 

Commitment can also be indicated by how early in 
an undergraduate program a person identifies with 
his or her chosen career. Perhaps the most reliable KEY POUNT 
indicator of commitment is the act of obtaining an Becoming involved in activities both within and outside 
undergraduate membership in a professional asso- of your department is one indication of your commit- 
ciation, many of which are referred to in the chap- ment to developing a successful professional career. 
ters that follow. Professional associations usually 
admit preprofessionals at reduced rates and offer 
them reduced registration rates at conferences. Another way to identify early with a physical 
Members receive the organization’s publication and activity profession is to obtain certification in an 
other information on a regular basis. area in which you plan to work. Respected certi- 

In addition, many kinesiology departments host fications are available to graduating kinesiology 
student clubs that align or affiliate with professional majors from such groups as the American College 
organizations—for example, Phi Epsilon Kappa, of Sports Medicine and the National Strength and 
a national professional honor society in health, Conditioning Association. 
kinesiology, recreation, and related fields. You can 
also indicate commitment by attending professional Engagement in College or University Life 
conferences. Professional associations usually hold In addition to academic performance, other indi- 
annual regional and national meetings that feature cators of your level of commitment to becoming a 
lectures, workshops, and exhibits of equipment successful professional can be found in your level 
used in professional practice. Attending professional of engagement in your department, school, and 
meetings can be expensive, but, then again, taking a community. Being engaged means being connected 
spring break trip to the beach is also costly—and it to and involved in what is happening around you. 
does not provide professional connections. Remem- Engaged students take responsibility for their aca- 
ber, keep your eye on your long-term goals and be demic experiences and their professional futures. 
willing to sacrifice to attain them. They are curious, and they constantly test their 

personal limits by seeking new ways to become 
involved in life experiences. They are active, ener- 

BeREYCPOLN eeeee ee getic leaders who view the department as their 
To get a head start on a successful career, take steps department and seek ways to participate in its 

to identify early with your chosen profession. Spe- operational life. They are likely to serve as leaders 

cifically, join appropriate professional organizations, in their major clubs or in student government or as 

attend conferences, establish alliances with veteran coordinators of charity events or other community 

professionals, and obtain professional certifications. activities outside of the academic environment. 
This engagement provides direct evidence of the 
caring and ethical skills required of professionals. 

Students who identify with a career early tend Besides becoming engaged in social and organi- 
to approach their studies with added excitement zational extracurricular activities, you should also 
and vigor. Their orientation changes from that of become involved in learning. Go beyond doing 



Chapter 10| Becoming a Physical Activity Professional 269 Zz 

Kinesiology Colleagues 

Dennis Johnson 
By the time he was a junior in high school, Dennis Johnson 
knew that he wanted to be a physical education teacher and 
wrestling coach. After a stellar high school athletic career, 
he earned a wrestling scholarship to Marshall University, 
where two influential professors inspired him to give as much 
attention to his academic goals as he was giving to wrestling. 
Upon graduation, true to his plan, he became a high school 
teacher and coach. For 13 years, he experimented with using 
physical education and sport experiences to teach life skills 
and social responsibility to young people, especially those 
from disadvantaged backgrounds. 

For the next chapter in his career, Johnson entered a doc- 
toral program at the University of North Carolina at Greens- 
boro. Following his graduation there, he joined the faculty 
at Wingate University. During the next 15 years, he taught 

=2ia"re ,  
aeness courses in the physical education teacher education program, 

coached cross country, and, for 5 years, served as assistant 
. ‘Photo courtesy of Karli Champ

. 
dean in the school of education. Johnson has been heavily 
involved in the North Carolina Alliance for Athletics, Health, 

Physical Education, Recreation, Dance, and Sport Management. Recently he has 
worked as a consultant for the National Wrestling Coaches Association, conducting leadership 
seminars for college and high school wrestling coaches and authoring risk management and coach 
development materials. Reflecting on his career, Johnson offered the following perspective: “One 
never knows where one’s career will lead; for me, it led to many different and exciting professional 
ventures.” 

well on course assignments and exams by asking preprofessionals to say that they want to serve 
yourself, “How can I take on even more responsi- others, nothing speaks louder than actions. As a 
bility for learning what I need to know in order to result, if two students have approximately equal 
succeed?” Does a professor need students to assist academic records, the advantage always goes to 
on a research project? Does your institution sponsor the one whose resume displays clear evidence of 
undergraduate research assistantships? Does your volunteer service to community agencies. These 
department sponsor community-based projects on groups might include such programs as Meals 
which you can work? Will a professor sponsor you on Wheels, Boys & Girls Clubs, local food banks, 
for an independent study on a topic of interest to Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts, shelters for homeless 
you? Don’t be afraid to express your interest in such persons, church-based programs, walkathons for 
projects. Independent study not only reflects a high various charities, and the American Red Cross. If 

level of commitment on your part but also offers a volunteer experience bears some relation to the 
an excellent opportunity to develop the leadership profession for which you are preparing, then it 
skills and knowledge that are essential for success offers the added benefit of socializing you into your 

in the world beyond college. future profession. Potential volunteer opportunities 
that you might want to explore include physical 

Participating in Volunteer Services therapy and sports medicine clinics, YMCAs and 

We have seen that the driving force for profes- YWCAs, youth sport organizations, schools, Special 

sionals, especially those in the helping profes- Olympics programs, and other agencies associated 

sions, is a desire to improve quality of life for with the physical activity professions. 

others in the community. Although it is easy for 



MR 270 Introduction to Kinesiology 

SeRE PON e complete a master’s degree. Doctoral training in 

kinesiology should be considered by those who 
Volunteering regularly for a community agency indi- 

envision a career as a professor at a college or 
cates that you share your profession’s commitment to 

university or as a researcher. 
service and constitutes an investment in your future 
career in the physical activity professions. 

The Decision-Making Process 
Now that you’ve read through the previous sec- 
tions, how would you answer these questions: 

Attending Graduate School 
Evidence of commitment to a profession can also 1. Do my attitudes, values, and goals match 

be reflected in plans to pursue advanced graduate those of professionals? 

work, and some 70 percent of entering college 2. Am I interested—really interested—in phys- 
students say that they intend to do so. In fact, in ical activity? 
some professions, such as physical therapy and 3. Do my attitudes, interests, and talents lend 
athletic training, a master’s or professional doc- themselves to a specific physical activity 
toral degree is a minimal entry degree. In addition, profession? 
permanent certification for teaching physical edu- 

4. Will my college or university program pre- 
cation requires a master’s degree or its equivalent 

pare me well? 
in many states. You may not be prepared to think 
about graduate school at this early point in your 5. Am I committed to preparing to be the best 

undergraduate career, or you may have decided professional possible? 

to delay that decision until a few years after you If you answered yes to all five questions, then you 
have graduated. This may be a sensible approach are well on your way to a successful career in a 
for many students. Overall, however, making an physical activity profession. The next five chapters 
early decision to continue with advanced graduate 

give you an in-depth look at some of the profes- 
education in the kinesiology-related professions is 

sions from which you can choose. 
another indication of commitment. 

If you hesitated on some questions or were 
Generally, master’s programs in kinesiology offer 

unsure of your answers, then the next five chap- 
advanced education both in a number of subdisci- 

ters may help you make a decision. Use this as 
plines (e.g., exercise physiology, motor learning, 

an opportunity to assess honestly and objectively 
sport history) and in professional areas (e.g., 

whether you are suited to professional work, and 
teaching physical education, fitness leadership, 

more specifically to professional work in one of 
athletic training, sport management). In determin- 

the physical activity professions. 
ing which institutions to consider for your own 
graduate work, you might find a faculty member at 
your institution to be an excellent source of infor- Wrap-Up 
mation. You might also find posters or brochures 
advertising graduate study at various institutions Career decisions are among the most important 

displayed in your departmental office. choices that people ever make. Such decisions are 

Master’s programs typically require 30 to 36 not irrevocable; in fact, you are likely to change 

credit hours of graduate course work, depending your career several times during your working 

on the specialization. In most cases, full-time mas- years. Nevertheless, you will gain nothing by 

ter’s students can complete their degree require- delaying your commitment to a career, and you 

ments in 1-1/2 to 2-1/2 years. Programs that require have much to lose by doing so. Students who make 

a thesis involve slightly fewer hours of course an early career commitment put themselves in a 

work but include an in-depth research project that better position to benefit from their undergraduate 

may take up to a year to complete. Some master’s education than do students who make only tenta- 

programs do not require a thesis but may include tive plans about the type of work that they will do 

additional course work; some programs that do when they graduate. If you have decided to attain 

not require a thesis do require an internship. If a degree in kinesiology by default (e.g., nothing 

you delay attending graduate school until after else seemed interesting) and life beyond graduation 

you have secured a professional position and plan looms like a great void, then you should take steps 
to do your graduate work by attending classes in to assess your compatibility with a career in the 
the evenings, you may need as long as 5 years to physical activity professions. 



Chapter 10| Becoming a Physical Activity Professional 

As we have explained, the process of career self-examination process. Now it is time to learn 
planning necessarily involves learning what it more about several physical activity professions 
means to be a professional and learning about the by studying the next five chapters. These chapters, 
types of work and work environments associated written by experts and scholars in the professions 
with each of the physical activity professions. It being described, provide specific information about 
also involves making a realistic assessment of your what it is like to work in each area. When you 
level of excitement and commitment to kinesiology have finished reading them, you should be in a 
and the physical activity professions. If this chapter good position to make important decisions about 
has achieved its goal, then you have begun this your career. 

MORE INFORMATION ON BECOMING A PHYSICAL ACTIVITY PROFESSIONAL 
Organizations 

Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs (CAAHEP) 

Professional Journals 

ACSM’s Health & Fitness Journal 

Journal of Physical Education, Recreation and Dance 

Strategies 

Strength and Conditioning Journal 

JMSURY OWS ANOS) 2 a a eae 
1. List three ways in which professional work differs from nonprofessional work. 

2. List two benefits of attending professional conferences and reading the professional literature. 

3. List three differences that you might observe between a community sport program leader 
who adheres to a mechanical, market-driven professionalism and one who adheres to a 
social trustee, civic professionalism. 

4, What is important about the liberal arts courses required of kinesiology majors? 

5. Why is an internship an important experience in preparing kinesiology students for pro- 
fessional practice? 

6. What are five questions that all kinesiology students should ask themselves before deciding 
to major in kinesiology? 

7. If you were an employer, what evidence would you use to determine an applicant’s general 
suitability for a professional position? 

8. What would be the ideal work history of a kinesiology graduate who seeks to enter the 
athletic training field? The health fitness field? The sport management field? 

9. If, during your second year of a kinesiology major, you decide to pursue a career as a 
physical education teacher after having entered as a sport management major, what is the 
best course of action to take? 

10. What study habits and extracurricular activities would improve your candidacy for a job or 
graduate school, and why? 

73HKPropel 9, Go to HKPropel to complete the activities for this chapter. 



st 

ou=gp>  
sae 

— 
a G1 a 
ee 

et, avn be deg Ge a 
Sige = Wan a on ena 

Pig ery wry ~ 
7 7 fi 

nee Lo 4 
—, a ag = 

= 
D= Uy Yr ae 

it hole 7 
P ° =m) (b euses 

60 Oey eed1)}  
a 6 a ¢ eaidpoyor » 7 

i 

npolien 

1 

ey ; ai 

i—  + 00 (er Aria, 
ate 

~ ieee 
; we ieh 
, : a OZ 

~ ieee ste eal 
: «hwy et 

re O18 ni 08 OF - 



alall 
Careers in Health and Fitness 



A lawyer wants to join his co-workers in a 150-m ile (240-kilometer) coe event to raise money . 
for a nonprofit organization. However, he hasn't biked more than 5 miles in 20 years. He wants o 
to hire you as his personal trainer to guide him in safely improving his cardiovascular endurance 
and fitness for this event. How should you proceed? 

You are talking with a new member of your facility. He tells you that he was relocated to your 
city by his employer and hopes to have as much success with you as with his previous trainer. He 
lost more than 100 pounds (45 kilograms) of weight while training at his old gym. Before he left 
his former facility, his personal trainer told him that he was “gaining about 8 pounds a month of 
muscle with his program,” and “because some of his fat was being turned-into muscle, he was 
probably losing more fat than the scale indicated.” Is it physically possible for someone to gain Sspbeedi ba 

8 pounds of muscle monthly while also losing this much body fat? Can body fat be converted to 
muscle? Do these comments make sense to you? Are they scientifically possible? No, of course NIA S 

not. How do you tell this new client that his former trainer was not well educated and gave him 
incorrect information? 

TaWaeil e  

A health and fitness director realizes 
oT 

that her facility should expand its pro- 
grams next year in order to better reach 
clients with disabilities. What additional 
_s taff will she need to hire? What should 

— their qualifications be? What new equip- 
ment and facility renovations will be 
required? will her buses! allow fort his 

itGilRanaEisarnE  ec sa  

ieEae 

These types of scenarios occur daily for health and conditioning coach, and public health educator. 
fitness professionals. In each case, the professional The scope of the professional work in this 
must make decisions that serve the best interests sphere is expanding to include a more multifaceted 
of the client and also match the goals, budget, and view of health and fitness. For decades, a health 
objectives of the environment, program, or facility. and fitness facility was viewed simply as a place 

Health and fitness, which is one of the spheres of to exercise; in other words, participants focused 
professional practice for kinesiology graduates (see on improving their fitness. Today, however, many 
the figure in the part III opener), includes many participants are motivated to join a health and 
dynamic professions. These professions encom- fitness facility in order to improve their physical 
pass such positions as group fitness instructor, health. Exercise and other forms of physical activity 
health and fitness specialist, health and wellness are increasingly appreciated as important tools for 
coach, personal trainer, health and fitness director, reducing the risk for common noncommunicable 
and specialty positions such as clinical exercise diseases (e.g., cardiovascular diseases, diabetes) 
physiologist, inclusive fitness trainer, strength and and for contributing to a longer, healthier life span. 

eg 274 



Chapter 11 |C areers in Health and Fitness 

As a result, the core goal of the health and fitness ones. That is because the primary causes of death 
professions today is to improve both the physical in the United States had changed substantially. 
functioning and the physical health of individuals For example, in 1910, 46 percent of deaths were 
and communities. due to infectious, or communicable, diseases 

These professions have traditionally been prac- while only 6 percent were due to heart disease, 
ticed in worksite, clinical, commercial, and com- a noncommunicable disease. However, by 2010, 
munity settings. In recent years, the lines between infections accounted for only 3 percent of deaths 
these settings have blurred as each type of program while heart disease accounted for 24 percent (Jones 
or facility has expanded its offerings to reach more et al., 2012). 
people with additional services. This blurring has Even with the COVID-19 pandemic of 2020-2021, 
created a variety of career opportunities for kine- cardiovascular diseases, of which heart disease is 
siology graduates. but one, remain the leading cause of death in the 

United States. It has held this dubious distinction 
for each of the past 100 years. Physical inactivity is 

The Need for Health 
a powerful contributor to the development of many 

and Fitness Professionals cardiovascular diseases, and physical activity may 
be the most potent factor in improving health and 

The 21st century is a great time for seeking a career longevity. With such concerns in mind, the 1996 
in the health and fitness professions. Because Surgeon General’s report concluded that Ameri- 
many people in the United States and other knowl- cans should engage in a minimum of 30 minutes 
edge-based economies are not nearly as active as of moderate activity on most days of the week in 
they should be for good health, the opportunities order to reduce their risk for poor health. 
for well-trained physical activity professionals have In 2008, the USDHHS published Physical Activ- 
never been better. In fact, the health and fitness ity Guidelines for Americans, which described the 
settings in which physical activities take place— department’s updated recommendations for phys- 
and the jobs that health and fitness professionals ical activity. This document reflected an increased 
perform—have been expanding for years as more understanding of how physical activity can best 
adults recognize the value of physical activity and contribute to improved health and decreased 
are willing to pay for it, both for themselves and mortality from many diseases. As a result, the 
for their children. new guidelines recommended that young children 

Scientific research and popular culture have pop- and teenagers engage in 60 minutes or more of 
ularized the understanding that regular physical physical activity per day. Moderate- or vigorous-in- 
activity can lead to a wealth of positive changes in tensity aerobic activity, as well as muscle- and 
the human body. Exercise can increase lean body bone-strengthening activities, should be performed 
mass and improve heart and lung function, immune at least 3 days per week. Adults were encouraged 
function, cognitive function, muscular strength, to engage in at least 150 minutes per week of 
flexibility, bone density, balance, and mental health. moderate-intensity aerobic activity or 75 minutes 
Perhaps the most important research finding is that per week of vigorous-intensity aerobic activity, or 
physical activity contributes substantially to lower- some combination of the two. The report also rec- 
ing the risk of death due to heart disease, which is ommended performing muscle-strengthening exer- 
the leading cause of mortality in the United States. cises on 2 or more days per week. These guidelines 

Numerous government reports have extolled the were updated in 2018 and, while our knowledge of 
indisputable virtues of physical activity for good the health benefits of physical activity continues to 
health. In 1996, the U.S. Department of Health and grow, these basic recommendations remain valid 
Human Services (USDHHS) published a document (USDHHS, 2018). 
titled Physical Activity and Health: A Report of the In 2010, the USDHHS published Healthy People 
Surgeon General. For more than a century, the 2020, a document that laid out overall health objec- 
Surgeon General has used such reports to focus tives for the nation. The objectives were based on 
the nation’s attention on the most important public a set of 26 leading health indicators, one of which 
health issues of the day, and they have led to inno- is physical activity. One objective of the report was 
vative public health initiatives. This 1996 report to reduce the proportion of adults who engage in 
differed from previous ones in an important way: no leisure-time physical activity and increase the 
It reflected a dramatic shift in focus from primar- proportion of both children and adults who meet 
ily communicable diseases to noncommunicable the 2008 Guidelines recommendations. Other objec- 



ms 276 Introduction to Kinesiology 

tives related to physical activity were to increase often find only slow acceptance and implementa- 

the proportion of the nation’s schools that require tion by many people. 
daily physical education, provide regularly sched- These changes also affect the responsibilities 

uled recess, and allow access to the school’s phys- placed on health and fitness professionals. These 
ical activity spaces and facilities outside of normal professionals are still asked to assess and train 

school hours. Yet another objective was to increase clients for improved fitness, but they also need to 
the proportion of physician office visits that include be able to develop individual and group exercise 
counseling or education related to physical activity. programs that connect to other physical, intellec- 

Table 11.1 provides a list of selected objectives tual, emotional, social, and spiritual dimensions. 

related to physical activity. The goal for all these Similarly, better health and fitness strategies need 
objectives was a 10 percent improvement in 2020 to be put in place in community, commercial, cor- 
as compared with 2010; this goal was met for four porate, and clinical settings. These changes—new 
of the six objectives. The next iteration of these evidence, new services, and expanded settings for 
national health objectives, Healthy People 2030, health and fitness professionals—create diverse 
will be available soon—and increasing the pro- opportunities for kinesiology graduates in this 
portion of people who meet the physical activity sphere. 
recommendations will continue to be an important 
health objective. 

All these evidence-based government documents Settings for Health and Fitness 
make clear that the public should not view physical The health and fitness field continues to evolve with 
activity as merely a recreational or physical fitness expanded job descriptions and a growing diversity 
endeavor. Rather, physical activity should be seen of positions available to both entry-level and experi- 
as a powerful strategy for health promotion and enced professionals. Traditionally, health and fitness 
disease prevention that is integral to U.S. public professionals have operated in four primary settings: 
health policies and societal well-being. However, worksite, commercial, clinical, and community. In 
as the Healthy People 2020 measures indicate, it is the past, these settings differed in their missions, 
not easy to find creative solutions for healthy living target markets, and programming objectives. Now, 
and to make substantial progress toward meeting however, for the reasons outlined earlier, these 
these goals. Changes in our understanding of the health and fitness settings have become more similar 
positive effects of exercise and physical activity than dissimilar. Examples include commercial set- 

Table 11.1 Selected Healthy People 2020 Physical Activity Objectives 

Progress as of 
Objective 2020 goal (%) 2020 (%) 

Reduce the proportion of adults who engage in no leisure-time physical activity. 3226 25:4, 

Increase the proportion of adults who engage in aerobic physical activity of atleast 47.9 54.2 
moderate intensity for at least 150 minutes per week, vigorous intensity for at least 
75 minutes per week, or an equivalent combination. 

_Increase the proportion of adults who engage in aerobic physical activity of at least 31.3 37.4 
moderate intensity for more than 300 minutes per week, vigorous intensity for more 
than 150 minutes per week, or an equivalent combination. 

Increase the proportion of adults who perform muscle-strengthening activities on2 24.1 27.6 
or more days of the week. ‘ 

Increase the proportion of adolescents who meet current federal physical activity 31.6 26: 
guidelines for aerobic physical activity. 

Increase the proportion of adolescents who meet current federal physical activity Cae? Baek 
guidelines for muscle-strengthening activity. 

Adapted from “Physical Activity Objectives.” Healthy People 2020. 



Chapter 11| Careers in Health and Fitness 

tings that offer worksite health promotion programs, employed adults who have access to and make use 
medically oriented settings that operate for-profit of employer-based exercise facilities and exercise 
fitness centers, and commercial swim facilities that programs. Worksite health and fitness programs 
offer rehabilitation pools. The lines have been fur- (often referred to as worksite health promotion 
ther blurred by the expansion into a fifth setting: programs) have experienced considerable growth 
population-based promotion of physical activity in during the past several decades. In the early 1980s, 
the field of public health. This new approach empha- fewer than 5 percent of employers offered worksite 
sizes promoting physical activity on larger scales health and fitness programs (O’Donnell & Harris, 
by integrating the effects of social, environmental, 1994). That figure is increasing; almost half (46.1 
government, and private organizations. percent) of all worksites now offer some type of 

program (Linnan et al., 2019). However, the range 
of programming varies by company size. For exam- 

SHECPOINL a ple, over three-fourths (75.8 percent) of companies 
Health and fitness professionals now operate in five with 500 or more employees offer programs to pro- 

overlapping types of settings—worksite, commercial, mote physical activity, while only one-fourth (24.7 

Clinical, community, and public health-oriented—that percent) of those with fewer than 25 employees 

focus on either increasing physical fitness or reducing do (Linnan et al., 2019). Moreover, small and low- 
wage companies are less likely to offer exercise 

the risk of noncommunicable diseases or both. 
programs (Hannon et al., 2012). 

The most commonly cited challenge to offering 
Each of the settings for health and fitness pro- a health promotion program is cost (Linnan et al., 

fessionals pursues specific objectives, identifies a 2019). This is unfortunate. Worksite health promo- 
specific population to address, and offers a partic- tion programs are designed to improve employee 
ular menu of programs. However, when seeking health, and for most companies, they also make 
employment in one of these settings, look at each good business sense. Robust evidence indicates 
potential employer on its own merits and avoid that well-run programs provide economic value to 
putting too much emphasis on the distinctions the stockholders of these companies. In fact, com- 

between worksite, commercial, clinical, community, panies with the best programs typically perform 

and population settings. As described in this chapter, better in the stock market than companies that do 

these settings overlap considerably, and all are rap- not have such good programs (Fabius et al., 2013; 

idly expanding the scope of the health and fitness Grossmeier et al., 2016; Goetzel et al., 2019). 

programs they offer. According to the International This difference may have any of a number of 

Health, Racquet & Sportsclub Association (HRSA), potential causes. Employees who participate in 

more than 183 million people worldwide were mem- wellness programs tend to remain with a company 

bers of over 210,000 health and fitness facilities in longer than nonparticipants, so there are fewer 

2018 CUnternational Health, Racquet & Sportsclub costs associated with employee turnover (Jenkins & 

Association, 2019). IHRSA categorizes these facilities Sherman, 2020). Healthier workers tend to be more 

as either commercial, not-for-profit (e.g., JCCs and productive and have fewer absences (Merrill et al., 

YMCAs; hospital-based clubs; residential, municipal, 2013); they also tend to have lower health care 

university, and military facilities), or miscellaneous costs. For more than 25 years, high-quality research 

(e.g., corporate fitness centers, resorts, spas, hotels, has shown a robust association between modifiable 

country clubs). Many exciting professional jobs are employee health risk factors and employer health 

available in each setting. Your ideal job will be the care expenditures (Goetzel et al., 1998; Goetzel 

one that best matches your goals as a professional. et al., 2012). Moreover, 10 modifiable risk factors 

The following sections describe each type of health have been consistently linked to 25 percent of all 

and fitness setting and provide an overview of the health care spending by employees and employers. 

objectives, types of programs, and target markets For example, employees with self-reported diabe- 

for each setting. They also describe key changes tes or hypertension had health care expenses 32 

and emerging trends. percent greater than those who did not. Costs were 
27 percent higher for those who were obese, 15 
percent higher for tobacco users, and 15 percent 

Worksite Settings higher for those with poor exercise habits (Goetzel 
One of the Healthy People 2020 objectives et al., 2012). However, when high-risk employees 
(USDHHS, 2010) is to increase the proportion of participate in a wellness program, they tend to be 



i 278 Introduction to Kinesiology 

successful in improving their risk factors (White ees’ well-being (Niebuhr & Grossmeier, 2015). For 
et al 2015). Clearly; then; tt'is in’ the best inter example, work-life balance initiatives have become 
ests of most companies to invest in a high-quality popular as methods to promote employee well- 
worksite health promotion program; it is good for ness in all dimensions of health. These initiatives 
the employees and good for the business. include flexible work schedules, on-site child care, 

Early worksite programs focused primarily on and leave-of-absence policies for caregiving and 
physical fitness, nutrition, weight control, stress other life events. Other popular worksite programs 
management, and smoking cessation and were include recreational activities, volunteer service 
available exclusively to employees of the spon- opportunities, financial planning, and employee 
soring company. Today, although programs vary assistance programs. In an effort to reduce the 
across companies, additional services have been medical costs of everyone covered by the company 
added to create a more comprehensive wellness health plan, some worksite programs now also offer 
culture centered on the needs of the employee. health and fitness services to employees’ family 
Examples include “health education classes, access members and to company retirees. 
to local fitness facilities, company policies that 
promote healthy behaviors such as a tobacco-free 
campus policy, employee health insurance coverage eid 01 e 
for appropriate preventive screenings, a healthy Employers have found that health and fitness programs 
work environment created through actions such are a good business practice. They can help reduce 
as making healthy foods available and accessible health care costs, increase productivity and morale, 
through vending machines or cafeterias, and, 

decrease absenteeism, and improve the organization’s 
finally, a work environment free of recognized 

corporate image. 
health and safety threats with a means to identify 
and address new problems as they arise” (Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, 2016). These Many companies have also built elaborate health 
programs may be offered by the company or and fitness facilities as a way to recruit and retain 
through a contract with an outside company. highly qualified employees. Other companies have 

These strategies result from an increased empha- contracted with local health clubs to offer access to 
sis on taking a more holistic approach to employ- exercise facilities at a reduced rate. In either case, 

Worksite health and fitness programs, such as this yoga class, can lead to increased productivity. 
© Human Kinetics 



Chapter 11] Careers in Health and Fitness 279 

the trend is for companies to establish partnerships on helping employees manage a chronic disease, 
with outside organizations with expertise in health such as hypertension or diabetes, that they already 
and fitness to manage their worksite health pro- had. However, the ROI was only $0.50 if the focus 
motion facilities and programs. For instance, Plus was on lifestyle changes needed to prevent these 
One Health Management Services provides on-site diseases. This low ROI stemmed partly from the dif- 
services at over 300 locations nationwide. The ficulty of determining the savings associated with 
company provides a variety of contracted services, a disease not occurring over the next several years. 
including fitness services, health promotion, regis- Nevertheless, many employers increasingly view 
tered dietitian nutritionist consulting, ergonomists, health promotion programs as an effective business 
and wellness coaching. strategy. About 60 percent of companies that offer 

Perhaps the most innovative change in worksite wellness programs indicate that their program 
health promotion has come about as many large helped reduce health care costs, and over 75 per- 
corporations have become self-insured. This change cent felt it was associated with decreased absen- 
has been driven by the relationship between per- teeism and improved productivity (Mattke et al., 
sonal health practices and soaring health care costs 2013). Programs are also considered important for 
for both the employer and the employee. According improving a company’s reputation and enhancing 
to a large 2019 employer survey, the average annual its ability to attract and retain the best employees 
health insurance premium for family coverage has (Tu & Mayrell, 2010). 
been steadily increasing. In 2019, the figure was 
$20,576, which is a 54 percent increase over that of Commercial Settings 
2009. About 30 percent of the premium is typically 
paid by the employee, and the remainder is paid Commercial health and fitness facilities typically 

by the employer (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2019). operate with the objective of generating a profit. 

Employees also pay a share of the cost when they The method by which a facility generates this 

use health care services. This fee, or deductible, profit places it in one of two distinct categories: 
 

increased dramatically from 2009 to 2019—by 162 sales-based facilities and retention-based facili- 

percent. In other words, employees are paying ties. These two business models are compared in 

more for their health care insurance and paying the following sections. However, many health and 

more out of pocket for health care usage. Therefore, fitness facilities do not fit neatly into one of these 

many companies choose to invest in disease pre- two categories. Instead, they use some practices 

vention and health promot from each in order to maximize their profit-making 
ion programs for their 

employees as a way to reduce their personnel costs. potential. 

Part of this increased investment may be due 
to the passage of health care reform, such as the 

SeKE PON =r 
Affordable Care Act of 2010, which provided sup- 
port for businesses to expand wellness programs Because commercial health and fitness facilities oper- 

and services to employees. This support included ate for profit, they compete for customers. This require- 
financial incentives in the form of reduced insur- ment encourages innovative programming and, ideally, 
ance premiums for employees who meet health employment of well-trained staff. These facilities are 
goals. As a result, many employers implemented either sales-based, retention-based, or a mix of both. 
wellness programs in order to reduce either direct 
medical costs or indirect medical costs, such as 
insurance claims. Unfortunately, this has often Commercial facilities offer health and fitness 

led to businesses viewing their worksite wellness services similar to those offered in many worksite 

programs in terms of their return on investment, fitness programs. Popular programs include fitness 

or ROI. In other words, how much money did the assessments, health risk screening, personal train- 

program save the company? It is quite challenging ing sessions, many different types of group training 

to determine this ROI, so some studies support the sessions, spa services, and access to other profes- 

cost-effectiveness of worksite wellness programs sionals such as massage therapists, physical thera- 

and some do not. For example, one study found pists, and registered dietitian nutritionists. Another 

that the ROI of many worksite wellness programs type of offering, which is becoming increasingly 

is about $1.50 for every $1.00 invested in the popular, consists of specialized exercise programs 

program (Mattke et al., 2014). The ROI was very for children of all ages, prenatal and postnatal 

good ($3.80) when the focus of the program was women, older adults, cancer survivors, and indi- 



a 280 Introduction to Kinesiology 

viduals with chronic diseases (e.g., Parkinson’s member must make a long-term commitment rather 
disease, obesity, diabetes). Commercial facilities than pay for membership on a monthly basis. 
also are increasingly catering to niche markets, such These contracts often work in the facility’s favor; 
as women’s fitness, sport- or performance-oriented even in programs of very high quality, more than 
training programs, personal training, dance, and half of new exercisers are likely to drop out within 
yoga. The nature of a for-profit business encourages 6 months of beginning the program. In these cases, 
innovation as a way to compete for customers in the the facility obtains the income from the long-term 
marketplace. Consequently, the commercial health contract without having the member using the 
and fitness business is dynamic and offers many facility. Consequently, sales-based facilities may be 
opportunities for health and fitness professionals best suited for people who are already exercising 
to become involved. but need a venue to do so, can exercise regularly 

at hours when the club is not full, and do not 
Sales-Based Facilities need extensive assistance from expert personnel. 
As the name suggests, sales-based health and fit- Many of these facilities occupy a useful niche in 
ness facilities focus primarily on membership sales the marketplace by providing low-cost access to 
activities. These facilities rarely place limits on the fitness equipment and indoor facilities. 
number of memberships sold, and they often offer Sales-based fitness facilities present two major 
discounted rates to attract large numbers of new barriers to improving the health and fitness of the 
customers. Historically, another characteristic of general population: their marketing practices and 
sales-based facilities has been the sale of long-term their sales strategies. These facilities often use 
membership contracts, or so-called future service advertising that features slender, muscular young 
contracts. To receive the best possible rate, a new models. Although this may be intended to show 

If this photo were used in an advertisement for a fitness facility, what barriers could it present to potential clients? Con- 
sider sizeism, ageism, and accessibility for clients who use wheelchairs. 
© Andres Rodriguez/fotolia.com 



Chapter 11 | Careers in Health and Fitness 

what could happen by joining the facility, they may focus on delivering high-quality programs and ser- 
deliver the message that exercise is only for those vices so that current members will remain and will 
who are already fit and healthy. Such messages be more likely to recommend the facility to others. 
may discourage the very people who would most Because retention-based facilities may not invest 
benefit from health and fitness programs—those in extensive advertising, referrals from current 
who are at risk for chronic diseases such as hyper- members are essential to achieving the goal of 
tension, diabetes, and obesity; those who are older; profitability. These facilities limit the number of 
those who have special health concerns; or those memberships sold, usually on the basis of a ratio 
who feel self-conscious about exercising. Given of members to available space. Staff members 
the fact that most Americans fall into these latter engage in sales activities only to replace members 
categories rather than the “lean and fit” category, who have left the club. As a result, they focus pri- 
this advertising approach is shortsighted. It would marily on meeting the needs of current members 
serve a facility’s best interests to cater to these by providing high-quality facilities and program- 
other groups. ming. Because of the additional cost of offering 

Another challenge lies in the fact that sales- high-quality programs and hiring qualified person- 
based facilities may lure prospective members in nel, monthly dues in retention-based facilities tend 
through manipulative and deceptive sales strategies to be higher than in sales-based facilities. 
that offer substantial membership discounts in Some forward-thinking fitness companies, such 
exchange for long-term commitments. As described as Planet Fitness, have achieved considerable suc- 
earlier, customers who make a long-term purchase cess by purposefully going against the traditional 
but whose needs are not met may stop using the sales-based model in favor of the retention-based 
facility. Even more concerning, this negative first model. They intentionally made joining their facil- 
experience with a health and fitness facility may ities inexpensive, removed long-term contracts, 
discourage them from getting involved with other, and also focused on creating a venue for first-time 
more suitable facilities or programs. exercisers or the casual user via their “Judgement 

Free Zones.” However, they also promoted their 
Retention-Based Facilities facilities aggressively, more like the stereotypical 
Selling memberships is an important aspect of sales-based fitness companies. This hybrid thinking 
any commercial health and fitness facility, but has resulted in their having over 2,000 locations 
retention-based facilities have a financial stake in and over 14 million members by 2020. The com- 

making a sincere effort to meet the long-term needs pany was named to Fortune magazine’s 2019 list 

of current members. These commercial facilities of 100 Fastest-Growing Companies. 

follow a “voluntary dues” philosophy. Members pay 
dues from month to month rather than paying one Clinical Settings 
large membership fee up front. The philosophy is 

The clinical setting category includes hospitals, 
that the facility will provide such good services that 

outpatient medical facilities, and sports medicine 
members will stay engaged and will not want to 

and physical therapy clinics. These facilities are 
look elsewhere. As a result, these facilities typically 

Hot Career Opportunity 
Boutique Fitness Centers 

Many students who want a career in health and fitness have the goal of opening their own facility. 

A hot trend in the fitness industry is the growth of fitness boutiques. The start-up costs of these 

facilities are usually much lower than those of the traditional big-box fitness center. Compared to 

the latter, fitness boutiques are smaller and provide more specialized experiences. They focus on 

a niche fitness activity. For example, CrossFit, SoulCycle, Orangetheory, and F45 are all successful 

fitness boutique companies, yet they have very different approaches to their exercise classes. An 

important commonality among these boutiques is that they strive to cultivate close relationships 

with their clients. The resulting sense of community has considerable appeal to the members. 

It is no surprise that, despite their higher fees when compared to traditional fitness centers, the 

growth of fitness boutiques has outpaced the overall fitness industry for the past few years. 



mE 232 Introduction to Kinesiology 

also often referred to as medically oriented gyms, such as high-quality health and fitness facilities 

or MOGs, and they have been a large growth and MOGs. 
area for health and fitness programs in the past This combination of (1) commercial settings with 
decade. They have their own professional organi- expertise in facility and program management and 

zation, the Medical Fitness Association, which was (2) clinical settings with expertise in specialized 
founded in 1991. Many administrators in clinical health services has become a popular business 
settings recognize the value of providing health model that presents qualified college graduates 
and fitness programs beyond the initial phases of with new job opportunities. Nevertheless, current 
insurance-supported rehabilitation. The objective trends in the clinical setting are not unlike those 
of these programs is to help patients manage in the worksite and commercial settings. Organi- 
their medical conditions and stay healthy. Besides zations in clinical settings are also building fitness 
improving the participants’ quality of life, MOGs facilities and offering a wide range of health and 
help reduce the risk of their needing expensive fitness programs delivered by qualified staff. In 
medical procedures in the future. These MOGs addition, these services and programs extend into 

are often integrated into the community’s local other dimensions of health besides physical fitness. 
medical environment and are often viewed as Much like worksite settings, some clinical settings 
extensions of the health care services provided in have also developed partnerships with commercial 
that environment. Many of these facilities also offer facilities or agencies that provide expertise in the 
memberships to the public. management of health and fitness facilities. One 

Examples of popular clinical programs include company that has been doing so is MedFit Partners. 
preventive screenings, physical therapy, cardiac Based in Evanston, Illinois, this company advertises 
rehabilitation, chronic disease management, water itself as a single-source provider for the expertise 
exercise therapy, childbirth and parenting educa- needed to develop a wellness center—from initially 
tion, weight management, and nutrition counsel- determining the feasibility of creating a center, to 
ing. By design, fitness professionals who work in constructing and equipping the facility, selecting 
clinical settings have more contact, and work in staff, and then marketing the wellness center. It 
partnership, with both medically based profession- has worked with dozens of hospitals over the past 
als and clients with diagnosed medical conditions. 20 years. 
A related initiative is Exercise is Medicine. This 
program is managed by the American College of Community Settings 
Sports Medicine and has the goal of making phys- 
ical activity assessment and promotion a standard The community setting includes many types of 

part of patient-health care provider interactions. health and fitness facilities. One of the largest 

The overall goal is to reduce the progression of segments of this setting consists of local branches 

chronic diseases by integrating the activities of of nonprofit organizations such as the YMCA, the 

health care providers with community resources YWCA, the JCC Association, and city parks and 
recreation departments. Community settings may 

Commercial Fitness With a Medical Mission 

In March 2005, Augie Nieto, co-founder of Life Fitness, one of the world’s largest commercial 
manufacturers of fitness equipment, was diagnosed with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, or Lou 
Gehrig’s disease). ALS is a progressive disease that destroys the nerve cells controlling muscles, 
ultimately causing complete paralysis. Under the banner Augie’s Quest to Cure ALS, Augie has ded- 
icated his time and energy to fundraising and research in order to find more effective treatments 
and, ultimately, a cure for ALS. The International Health, Racquet & Sportsclub Association (IHRSA), 
the trade association of high-quality commercial clubs, has assisted Augie by hosting an annual 
fundraising gala at its annual conference and trade show. Many IHRSA member clubs have also 
participated via their own fundraising programs. Under Augie’s leadership, over $150 million has 
been raised for ALS-related research since 2006. Through this funding and a partnership with the 
ALS Therapy Development Institute, scientists are searching for the elusive treatment and cure. 
To learn more about Augie’s Quest—and how a health and fitness community can come together 
in innovative ways—visit their website, https://augiesquest.org/. 



Chapter 11|Careers in Health and Fitness 283 

also include health and fitness facilities and pro- surrounding communities; these groups do not 
grams that operate in churches, universities, and typically operate as nonprofit entities. The motives 
apartment complexes. Health and fitness programs behind these activities are varied and can include 
offered in community settings may be funded by a desire to help, to improve public relations in the 
these organizations, by government grants, or community, to offer volunteer opportunities for 
by other philanthropic donations. This funding employees, to reduce tax exposure, and to improve 
sometimes reduces the cost of community health long-term business strength. 
and fitness services in comparison with that of In one example, the International Health, 
commercial settings. Racquet & Sportsclub Association recognizes the 

Typically, health and fitness programs in com- importance of community service by presenting an 
munity settings seek to fill a specific community annual award for outstanding community service 
need. Most target a specific community group and to a member that has demonstrated a long-stand- 
try to reach as many people in that group as their ing commitment to making a difference in the 
resources allow. Many facilities in community set- community. In 2019, the recipient was Midtown 
tings receive outside funding and are classified as Le Sporting Club Sanctuaire of Montreal, Quebec, 
nonprofit organizations for tax purposes. This clas- Canada. It was recognized for its commitment to 
sification enables them to offer health and fitness raising awareness of mental health issues. Their 
programming at low cost and to provide financial efforts included working with the Montreal Jewish 
assistance to those who could not otherwise afford General Hospital Foundation and Auxiliary to host 
to participate. For example, more than 200 YMCAs the hospital’s MINDSTRONG fitness event. This 
across the United States offer a diabetes prevention event has raised almost $4.5 million in the past four 
program (YMCA of the USA, 2016) specifically years to support mental health services. 
targeted to at-risk individuals. This work is part of 
the National Diabetes Prevention Program offered Population-Based Settings 
by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
This low-cost program encourages patient referrals A major shift has occurred in the diseases that 

from health care providers. plague the United States, as well as much of the 

The types of programs offered in community world. With the exception of COVID-19 in 2020 

settings are as diverse as those offered in worksite, and 2021, the vast majority of deaths nowadays are 

commercial, and clinical settings. They may include due to noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) rather 

walking groups for seniors, community cardiac than infectious diseases. NCDs usually develop as a 

rehabilitation programs, aquatic exercise, group consequence of lifestyle choices. The development 

exercise, and yoga classes. Resources are typically of the most lethal cardiovascular disease, ischemic 

more limited in the community setting, which leads heart disease, is markedly affected by tobacco use, 
dietary habits, physical activity habits, and obesity. 

to greater reliance on volunteers or minimally 
Cancers are the second leading cause of death, 

trained employees in order to meet many staffing 
and they are also mostly due to lifestyle choices. 

needs. For example, the American Diabetes Asso- 
The vast majority of lung cancer cases, the leading 

ciation offers Project Power, a program aimed at 
cause of cancer death in the United States, is due 

reducing diabetes by reducing the prevalence of 
to tobacco use. However, in women, the combina- 

childhood obesity. Focused on engaging the entire 
tion of excess body weight, alcohol usage, poor 

family, it is designed to be offered by churches 
diet, and physical inactivity contributes to cancer 

in communities of color. Some programs may be 
risk even more than tobacco use alone (Islami et 

offered on a for-profit basis as a way of generating 
al., 2018). 

revenue to deliver other community service pro- 
grams at little or no cost to participants. For exam- Encouraging lifestyle change is an important 

focus in most health and fitness settings, but the 
ple, many YMCAs sell health club memberships, 

population-based setting does so in a different way. 
with some of these funds used to offset the costs of 

nonprofit programs such as youth summer camps The other settings discussed here focus on working 
with people in relatively small groups, ranging from 

and programs for individuals with special needs. 

Community-based nonprofit organizations are 
the one-on-one interactions of a personal trainer 
to the small groups of a fitness instructor and the 

not the only entities that offer community health 

and fitness programs. A growing number of com- 
larger groups in a facility or community setting. 
In the population-based setting, and as the name 

panies and clinical entities have expanded their 

missions to include contributing to the health of suggests, the focus is placed on an entire popula- 



mg 284 Introduction to Kinesiology 

tion—for example, a city, a county, a state, or even a demands. The most important element of this evo- 

nation—with the goal of reducing the population’s lution may be the fact that most health and fitness 

overall disease and disability burden. A population positions now require some expertise in multiple 

may also be defined as a group of people whose areas. In addition, as described in chapter 10, it is 

physical activity is affected in particular ways such critical that you fully understand what it means to 

as by weather, geography, culture, or ethnicity. be a professional; therefore, the discussion here 

A large segment of employment in this setting emphasizes this common aspect of these jobs. 

consists of local health departments, state agen- The types of jobs available in a health and 
cies, and voluntary health agencies such as the fitness facility depend more on the specific pro- 
American Heart Association, the American Lung grams offered by the facility than on the way in 
Association, and the American Diabetes Associa- which the job is categorized. Someone hired as a 
tion. The responsibilities shouldered by a person personal trainer may also be asked to lead group 
working in population settings can be quite broad. exercise classes or to perform some of the duties 
For example, there may be a need to assess health of a health and wellness coach. The take-home 
trends and risk factors for specific groups within message here is that it is in your best interests to 
the population, develop appropriate interventions be as knowledgeable and skilled as possible in 
in order to reduce these risk factors, pursue funding a wide array of health and fitness occupational 
to implement the interventions, and then imple- areas and to develop a professional mind-set in 
ment them. The complexity of these activities often approaching these occupations. A common mis- 
requires a multidisciplinary team. Consequently, take made by students is that they do not seek 
health and fitness professionals may work with out opportunities for professional development 
physicians, psychologists, epidemiologists, poli- beyond those given by their college coursework. 
ticians, corporations, community planners, and a Don’t make this mistake; gain hands-on experience 
number of other professionals. by working in a local health and fitness facility, 

Competing for such jobs often requires advanced completing relevant internships, or volunteering at 
training, such as a graduate degree in kinesiology an appropriate clinic or MOG. Besides increasing 
or a master of public health degree. However, an your professional skills, these experiences may help 
undergraduate degree focused on health promotion you identify what aspects of a career in health and 
and health education would be good preparation fitness appeal most to you. 
for pursuing the Certified Health Education Special- 
ist credential offered by the National Commission Group Exercise Instructor 
for Health Education Credentialing. Health educa- 
tors typically focus on community-wide program- Once referred to as an aerobics instructor, the posi- 

ming efforts to improve a broad array of healthy tion of group exercise instructor has changed in 

lifestyles, policies, or environments. Another recent decades. Group exercise instructors continue 

well-respected certification that is focused more to lead aerobic exercise classes, but they now serve 

narrowly on promoting physical activity, the ACSM/ a broader population and provide instruction in a 

NPAS Physical Activity in Public Health Specialist, variety of other activities as well. For example, they 

is also available to people with a bachelor’s degree. might teach outdoor activities, they might teach 

To be eligible to sit for this exam, you must have aquatic fitness, or they might teach exercise classes 

either a bachelor’s degree in a health-related field for specific populations, such as prenatal and 

from an accredited university or a bachelor’s degree postnatal women, seniors, children, or clients who 

in any subject and 1,200 hours of experience in need medically supervised exercise. In the 1970s 

settings that are oriented toward physical activity and 1980s, an aerobics studio was little more than 

or health promotion. an empty room with mirrors and a sound system. 
Those days are gone. Group exercise instructors 
are now more likely to use a variety of functional 

Roles for Health and Fitness equipment, such as steps, spinning bikes, exercise 

Professionals bands, dumbbells, fitness and exercise balls, and 
barbells. In most places, this position exists as a 

This section describes the types of jobs available part-time job with hourly pay. 
across the different health and fitness settings. The aging of the U.S. population has brought an 
It also discusses the evolution of these jobs in increasing number of older and higher-risk clients 
response to public policy, social forces, and market into the group exercise setting. What was once an 



Chapter 11| Careers in Health and Fitness 285 

Rise of Noncommunicable Diseases 

Perhaps the most alarming trend that will drive future growth in the health and fitness industry is 
the rising incidence of noncommunicable diseases (NCDs), or chronic diseases. This is a global 
problem. The World Health Organization (2018) estimates that NCDs kill 41 million people each 
year, or almost three-quarters of all deaths. The leading killer is cardiovascular disease, followed 
by cancer, respiratory disease, and diabetes. These four diseases account for over 80 percent 
of all NCD deaths. A disproportionate number of these deaths occur in low- and middle-income 
countries, although NCDs account for almost 90 percent of all deaths in the United States. Apart 
from the tragic losses on the personal and familial levels, the socioeconomic impact is staggering. 
For example, NCDs will cost the United States an estimated $95 trillion from 2015 to 2050 (Chen 
et al., 2018). When expressed as a per capita amount, this is a loss of $265,000 per person 
over this time period! These costs include the cost of treatment, lost productivity due to illness 
or premature death, and the expenses associated with living with an NCD. 

This problem is certainly too big to be solved by any one profession or industry. At the same 
time, it may well come to define the health and fitness profession because the expertise embod- 
ied in this profession is ideally situated to make a major contribution to reducing NCDs. This is 
because critical contributors to NCDs include lifestyle issues such as tobacco use, physical inac- 
tivity, unhealthy diet, and the use of alcohol. By working to reduce such risk factors, well-trained 
health and fitness professionals can be tremendously helpful to their clients. Doing so, however, 
has been and will continue to be a challenge. 

Although many people are interested in personal wellness, behavior change, and health and 
lifestyle improvement, government lifestyle indicators show that actual efforts to improve and 
maintain health are often inadequate. Indeed, 30 years of wellness programs and education ini- 
tiatives have been unsuccessful at the population level, largely because the delivery has been pay 
as you go, based on risk management, and clinical compliance rather than on evoking sustained 
behavior change. Thus, the missing component over the last few decades has been sustainable 
engagement. Solving this challenge is the key goal for any employer, funder (whether insurer or 
government), or educational initiative. This is one of the great challenges of our time, and you, as 
a kinesiology student and potential health and fitness professional, can play an enormous role 
in this work. 

aerobics studio filled exclusively with young adults occupation holds a monopoly on the delivery of 
performing complicated dance routines is now a certain services, the work is guided by formal and 
studio filled with a diversity of individuals. Con- informal ethical codes of conduct, and standards 
sequently, group exercise instructors can develop of professional practice are observed within the 
expertise in an array of class “types” in addition relevant working subculture. 
to the stereotypical aerobics classes: cardiorespi- The occupation of group exercise instructor has 

ratory classes (step, kickboxing, indoor cycling), some of these characteristics but certainly not all. 
dance (Zumba, pole fitness), strength development For instance, the activities performed in a group 
(kettlebells, boot camp), mind-body classes (yoga, exercise class can be complex, but the instructor 
Pilates, tai chi), and classes that are designed for can also lead the class while remaining ignorant 
special populations (older adults, cancer survivors). of the underlying scientific theory or knowledge. 

Instructors should be dynamic, possess excellent In other words, the instructor can know the how 

leadership skills, and enjoy working with people without knowing the why. As a result, many people 

in a group setting. learn how to be an instructor through on-the-job 

Recall from chapter 10 that an occupation training—first participating in exercise classes and 

constitutes a profession if it has certain character- then gradually working into the role of instructor. 

istics. Specifically, the work performed requires In many health and fitness facilities, this work is 

mastery of complex skills grounded in theory, the viewed as an entry-level position and constitutes 

services are performed for clients or patients, the part-time, hourly employment. For example, the 



a 286 Introduction to Kinesiology 

prerequisites for most certifications in group fitness concerns) and working toward specific client goals 

instruction are quite modest. These usually include (e.g., improved appearance, injury rehabilitation, 

being at least 18 years old, being current in CPR and participation in a 10K race or triathlon). Increas- 

AED registration and, perhaps, having completed ingly, personal trainers cater to these market 

high school. Clearly, then, the expertise derived segments by offering not just individual services 
from earning a kinesiology degree is not needed, but also small-group specialty fitness programs; in 
and these positions are not truly professional. this way, specialty fitness programs bridge the gap 

between one-on-one personal training and group 
exercise. Such programs are usually offered to small 

Personal Trainer 
groups of two to six people each for a defined 

Personal trainers typically work one-on-one with time and are usually focused on a specific goal, 
clients and, because of this increased supervision, such as weight loss. These programs have grown 
usually receive higher pay than group exercise in popularity because they give people access to 
instructors. Some personal trainers work inde- personalized training, thus making the service 
pendently, traveling to individual clients’ homes, appealing and affordable to a wider population. 
offering virtual classes, conducting training ses- In order to succeed, personal trainers need a 
sions outdoors, or subcontracting with a health variety of skills. Besides having a strong knowledge 
and fitness facility or private gym. Trainers may bill base in fitness assessment and exercise prescrip- 
for their services hourly, weekly, or monthly. Most tion, they must be excellent communicators and 
often, however, a personal trainer is employed by a counselors; possess strong business skills in sales, 
health and fitness facility but directly markets his or marketing, administration, and time management; 
her own services to members. In this arrangement, and be able to work with a diverse client popula- 
the trainer and the facility split the fees charged tion. Personal trainers are the artists of the health 
to the client. On the other hand, some facilities and fitness professions. Besides evaluating indi- 
hire personal trainers as independent contractors, vidual clients’ needs and designing individualized 
thereby obligating the trainers to operate their programs, they must continually present new and 
own businesses, pay their own taxes, obtain their exciting ways to keep clients on track during their 
own health insurance, and forgo paid vacation exercise sessions. This approach helps keep clients 
and sick days. interested and motivated to adopt and maintain 

Although personal trainers can earn substantial new healthy behaviors as part of their lifestyle. 
income, doing so is not easy. A new trainer needs The qualifications needed by a personal trainer 
to build and retain an adequate base of clients. vary dramatically across different types of health 
Consequently, as exemplified by many celebrity and fitness facilities. In some facilities, personal 
personal trainers, success may depend more on trainers are not required to have a relevant college 
good marketing and sales skills than on profes- degree or relevant certifications. They may be little 
sional expertise. Moreover, personal trainers work 

more than “hard bodies” or “fitness models” who 
when their clients are available, which often means 

have learned some skills through personal exercise 
long work hours, including early mornings, late 

but lack substantive knowledge about the science 
evenings, and weekends. 

of human physical activity. At the other end of the 
At the same time, working as a personal trainer spectrum, the personal trainers at some facilities 

provides a unique opportunity for the health and 
are truly professionals. They are required not only 

fitness professional to develop ongoing relation- 
to have a college degree in their field and be cer- 

ships with clients. This aspect of the job can be 
tified by a nationally recognized association but 

personally rewarding since a trainer can play a 
also to have specialized training and many years 

critical role in a client’s success. For example, 
of experience. An increasing trend in commercial 

a trainer can assess clients’ needs and quickly 
health and fitness facilities is to classify personal 

implement new strategies for behavior change. If 
trainers based on skill, experience, sales volume, 

qualified to do so, personal trainers can also work 
education, and certifications held. In this case, a 

with clients on a number of health issues, such as 
more advanced trainer may be called a master 

weight management, chronic disease management, 
trainer. Experienced trainers can usually charge 

general fitness, and sport conditioning. 
higher rates for their services and therefore earn 

Current trends in this occupation include spe- 
higher rates of pay from their facilities. 

cialization in working with specific populations Over the past decade, the U.S. public has become 
(e.g., older adults, children, clients with medical 

more knowledgeable about the types of credentials 



Chapter 11| Careers in Health and Fitness 237 Zz 

Working with a qualified personal trainer is a good way to get an individualized training program. 
© Human Kinetics 

and certifications that are appropriate for personal described here. Therefore, when seeking employ- 
trainers. Simply being fit is not an acceptable ment as a personal trainer, it is to your advantage 
qualification. Unfortunately, however, most certifi- to assess the qualifications of the personal trainers 
cations for personal trainers use the same minimal working in the facility in order to help you deter- 
prerequisites used for group exercise instructors. mine whether it is the type of facility you want to 
However, it is becoming more common to see be part of. 
personal trainers who have a bachelor’s degree in 
kinesiology. Regardless, in order to be marketable, Health and Fitness Specialist 
personal trainers must also have extensive experi- 
ence in working with clients on a variety of health The health and fitness specialist position is typi- 

and fitness issues. They must also keep their skills cally a professional position for individuals who 
have completed a bachelor of science degree in 

current by attending conferences, workshops, and 
kinesiology or exercise science as well as addi- 

other continuing education programs. 
tional training and certifications. Job duties include 

As you can see, personal trainers have complex 
conducting fitness and functional assessments and 

responsibilities, and they need a robust scientific 
designing comprehensive, individualized exercise 

knowledge base to meet these responsibilities. 
Therefore, this occupation should be viewed as a programs that incorporate strength, flexibility, 

and aerobic fitness components and maximize 
profession, as defined in chapter 10. Recognize, 

safety and long-term results. In many health and 
however, that some people who work as personal 

trainers do not have the appropriate background fitness facilities, these duties are performed by the 
same employees who work as personal trainers 

and training to truly fulfill the responsibilities 



ma 288 Introduction to Kinesiology 

or health and wellness coaches. This job provides The following job description has been provided 
opportunities to introduce a variety of people to by the International Consortium for Health and 

the benefits of exercise. For many sedentary adults Wellness Coaching. 
who are joining their first health and fitness facility, 

Health and Wellness Coaches partner with 
the health and fitness specialist is the first person 

clients seeking self-directed, lasting changes, 
they meet who can either excite or discourage 

aligned with their values, which promote 
them in their efforts to become fitter and health- 

health and wellness and, thereby, enhance 
ier. Most reputable health and fitness facilities 

well-being. In the course of their work, health 
provide new participants with a health screening 

and wellness coaches display unconditional 
or fitness assessment. In this process, the health 

positive regard for their clients and a belief 
and fitness specialist assess such things as blood 

in their capacity for change. They respect the 
pressure, body composition, aerobic capacity, mus- 

idea that each client is an expert on his or 
cular strength, muscular endurance, and flexibility. 

her life, and ensure that all interactions are 
The results are used to design an individualized 

respectful and non-judgmental. 
program that meets the client’s specific health and 
fitness needs. Because health and wellness is such a broad 

Because so many adults in the United States concept, the job duties of these coaches can also be 
have health concerns besides physical inactivity, quite broad. As with most of the professional posi- 
there is a growing niche for specialists with the tions described in this section, the actual responsi- 
skills needed to work with people who have health bilities are partly dependent on the facility within 
concerns. These skills are diverse and specific to which they work. So a coach may be required to 
the programs offered by the health and fitness conduct health and fitness screenings or to develop 
facility. Examples of these skills include measuring exercise programs. However, the true expertise of 
and assessing resting metabolic rate, designing health and wellness coaches is in their ability to 
an exercise program for a postpartum woman or help a client make appropriate behavior changes. 
an older adult with balance issues, and working In other words, health and wellness coaches help 
with a patient recently discharged from a cardiac facilitate attitudinal and behavioral changes in their 
rehabilitation program. As with health and wellness clients in order to help the clients succeed. This 
coaches, these specialists may also help clients to approach differs from the approach often used by 
adopt healthier behaviors that will improve the personal trainers. In many trainer-—client relation- 
underlying health concern, such as obesity or ships, the trainer is the expert. The trainer tells the 
hypertension. client what to do and the client then follows the 

Finally, the term, health fitness specialist is not instructions. A health and wellness coach works to 
universally used in the health and fitness industry; empower the client to make his or her own healthy 
titles such as medical exercise specialist and exer- 

choices. In this approach, the client is ultimately in 
cise physiologist may be used. Although the latter charge of determining his or her most important 
term is common, its use in this context can be mis- goals and how to achieve them. This collaborative, 
interpreted. Exercise physiology is a subdiscipline 

side-by-side, client-centered coaching approach is 
of kinesiology, and, historically, the term exercise 

far superior if the goal is to evoke behavior change. 
physiologist has traditionally referred to faculty 

A health and wellness coach typically works 
with doctoral-level training who perform research 

with clients over several sessions. They may first 
in the field of exercise physiology. 

assess the clients’ readiness for change (Prochaska 
& DiClemente, 1986) and ask them to assess their 

Health and Wellness Coach own current health. From there, they may help 

The position of health and wellness coach may be clients to identify gaps between their current state 

the most exciting growth area in the health and of health and their desired state, help them to 

fitness professions. Health and wellness coaches identify short- and long-term goals, and then help 

provide guidance to diverse populations on a broad them determine the steps needed to move toward 

range of health and fitness topics and are in increas- the desired state of optimal health. 

ingly high demand in worksite wellness programs. Health and wellness coaches must have appro- 

In some facilities, this position has either replaced priate training and certifications. They should also 
that of personal trainer or health and fitness spe- participate in continuing education. They must have 
cialist or has been “hybridized” with it; in other excellent communication skills, must enjoy helping 
facilities, it exists as a new category of employee. people, and must understand principles of behav- 



Chapter 11] Careers in Health and Fitness 289 

ior change. They must also have an understanding Health Coach Certification, is the only relevant 
of the current evidence-based recommendations certification accredited by the National Commission 
related to a broad range of health topics and be for Certifying Agencies. 
able to engage people. It is highly recommended that students with an 

As with the other health and fitness occupations, interest in working in health and fitness facilities 
health and wellness coaches must choose from a consider pursuing a health and wellness coach 
host of academic and nonacademic training pro- certification. There is a tremendous need for health 
grams purporting to help them develop expertise. and wellness coaching skills in order to bridge the 
As with the other occupations, some of these pro- gap between the chronic health conditions (e.g., 
grams are very good; others are not. Unlike individ- obesity, heart disease, hypertension, diabetes) that 
uals in the other occupations, health and wellness affect many clients and the lifestyle changes needed 
coaches have far fewer options for certification to improve these conditions. The Affordable Care Act 
from well-regarded professional organizations with and subsequent legislative efforts to revise health 
appropriate expert support. The National Board insurance nationally may promote the use of pre- 
Certified Health & Wellness Coach was developed ventive services to maintain patients’ health, thus 
by the National Board for Health and Wellness helping to create a health care environment that is 
Coaching. Training programs leading to eligibility highly conducive to employment opportunities for 
to sit for this certifying examination are offered health and wellness coaches. Steps in this direction 
by a number of academic and for-profit organiza- were seen when, in 2019, the American Medical 
tions. This certification has been approved by the Association recognized health and wellness coach- 
National Board of Medical Examiners. Another cer- ing as an emerging, and potentially reimbursable, 
tification, the American Council on Exercise (ACE) service. Consequently, in addition to having job 

Case Study in Transitioning From School to a Work Setting 

Will was hired several weeks ago as a personal trainer at a commercial gym that specializes in 
training athletes. He had earned his bachelor of science degree in kinesiology from a program 
that emphasized the importance of fitness assessments, health screening, and safe exercise 
techniques when working with adults who want to become fitter and healthier. During his first few 
weeks on the job, he noticed that most of his fellow trainers were promoting nutritional supplements 
to their clients and developing very detailed diet plans for them. He knew from reading the trainer 
biographies posted on the lobby wall that, while many of the trainers in this facility had a formal 
degree in kinesiology, none of them had a degree in nutrition, advanced training in dietetics, or a 
license as a registered dietitian nutritionist (RDN). 

Will was worried that his fellow trainers were not qualified to give specific eating plans to clients, 
much less recommend specific supplements. As a consequence, they were being negligent in 
providing evidence-based nutrition recommendations, thus potentially wasting clients’ money and, 
worse, putting them at risk for adverse physical performance or health complications. Furthermore, 
he was concerned that without including an RDN in these dietary programs, the personal trainers 
and the health and fitness facility were putting themselves at risk of being sued for practicing 

dietetics without a license. Will was thinking about approaching his manager to discuss this concern. 

Your Decision 

What do you think Will should do in this situation? 

Resolution 

Will decided to talk to his manager and express his concerns. His manager listened carefully. She 

then explained that the selling of supplements was a major contributor to the facility's profits and 

the personal trainers’ incomes. And developing eating plans was “not a big deal, since it’s mostly 

common sense.” When Will expressed concern that everyone involved could be sued, she said it 

was worth the risk. Will did not want to work in a facility that engaged in these unethical practices, 

so he began looking for a new job. 



a 290 Introduction to Kinesiology 

options in commercial fitness facilities, health and lenging and can offer increased earning potential. 
wellness coaches may also be hired by health insur- However, many of them are licensed professions. 
ance providers or worksites to improve employee They require graduate education and additional 
health and decrease medical expenditures. For per- qualifications beyond what is provided by a bache- 
spective, kinesiology-trained graduates commonly lor’s degree in kinesiology or in another discipline 
provide similar preventive physical activity services related to health and fitness. In other words, a 

that are supported by health insurance in Canada bachelor’s degree, even with very good grades and 
and various European countries. additional relevant experience, may serve only as 

a starting point in becoming prepared for one of 

Specialty Positions these professions. 
While some of these specialty positions are 

Many health and fitness settings now incorporate reviewed in later chapters of this textbook, fol- 
specialty positions into their programs, including lowing are several examples. First, becoming a 
the following (see also chapter 12): physical therapist requires completion of a 3-year 

¢ Clinical exercise physiologist doctor of physical therapy degree from an accred- 
ited program and passing a state licensure exam. 

¢ Physical therapist 
Second, becoming an athletic trainer requires 

¢ Athletic trainer a master’s degree in athletic training from an 
¢ Sport coach accredited program and passing a comprehensive 

* Registered dietitian or registered dietitian certification examination. Third, the first step to 

nutritionist becoming a registered dietitian nutritionist is to 
graduate from an academic degree program that 

¢ Population specialist (e.g., working with 
meets the requirements set forth by the Academy 

older adults, children, people with chronic 
disease) of Nutrition and Dietetics and is accredited by the 

Accreditation Council for Education in Nutrition 
e Public health educator and Dietetics. While an appropriate undergraduate 

Specialty positions provide services that go degree is currently sufficient to take the registration 
beyond those provided by other health and fitness examination for dietitians, a graduate degree will 
professionals. These jobs can be exciting and chal- be required beginning in 2024. Finally, the rigor 

Geasi tet t a la ay 

The health and fitness field encompasses many types of careers. 
© Human Kinetics 



Chapter 11| Careers in Health and Fitness 201 

of many kinesiology undergraduate programs also search using the term “celebrity nutritionist” will 
enables high-achieving students to compete for reveal an appalling number of unqualified people 
admission to medical, physician assistant, dental, who call themselves nutritionists.) The distinction 
and other allied health graduate programs. Kine- between legally qualified dietitians and self-de- 
siology programs now enroll many undergraduate scribed nutritionists is difficult for clients to under- 
students who are pursuing their degree in order stand; it is also confusing for many in the health and 
to better prepare them for careers in a health care fitness industry. For this reason, the Academy of 
field. The common feature in all of these specialized Nutrition and Dietetics recently changed the name 
career examples is that an undergraduate degree in of their professional credential from “registered 
kinesiology can be an excellent first step. dietitian” to “registered dietitian nutritionist.” An 

What differences exist between the health and RD and an RDN do not differ in their qualifications; 
fitness professions and these other specialty pro- they mean the same thing. So why the change? It 
fessions? In some cases, the distinction is relatively was implemented entirely to help clients under- 
clear-cut due to the credentials needed. The unique stand that “all Registered Dietitians are nutritionists 
educational and credentialing requirements for ath- but not all nutritionists are Registered Dietitians” 
letic trainers or physical therapists are commonly (Commission on Dietetic Registration, 2016). 
known. In the United States, licensure to practice Of course, clients may also ask RDNs about 
physical therapy is required in all 50 states; for exercise programs. In the absence of any spe- 
athletic trainers, it is required in 49 states. On the cialized training, these professionals should limit 
other hand, distinctions can be harder to make their advice to basic, general exercise information. 
in practice. Consider the question of how to lose However, if they did overstep the bounds of their 
weight—a common concern of many people join- expertise and provide information that fell within 
ing a fitness facility. Health and fitness specialists, the expertise of health and fitness professionals, 
health and wellness coaches, and personal trainers they would not be viewed in the United States as 
are often asked for dietary advice. These profes- practicing kinesiology without a license. This is true 
sionals can ethically provide basic, general nutrition simply because neither licensure nor registration 
information to healthy adult clients. But they are with a national accrediting body is required to be 
not qualified to prescribe a specific diet or to rec- allowed to dispense exercise-related information. 
ommend special dietary supplements to anyone, By contrast, in Canada, some provinces offer licens- 
and they should not make dietary recommenda- ing of kinesiology professionals that does provide 
tions to clients with specific health conditions. some protection of the physical activity domain. 
Doing any of these things is unethical and, in most Earlier in this chapter, we discussed the issue 
courts of law, could be considered malpractice in of noncommunicable diseases (NCDs). NCDs com- 
the form of practicing dietetics without a license. prise a modern health care crisis, but health and 
This is because 47 states have enacted legislation fitness professionals can play a significant role in 
that regulates the practice of dietetics. Certain skills reducing the prevalence of these diseases. There 
are legally viewed as being within the scope of are a number of career opportunities, or specialty 
practice of registered dietitians (RDs) or registered positions, available for the interested student. 
dietitian nutritionists (RDNs) but not health and One such opportunity is in the area of cardiac 

fitness professionals. rehabilitation. Many people have some type of 
Becoming an RD/RDN requires additional cardiovascular disease (CVD) and, of all the NCDs, 

course work, an undergraduate major in nutrition, CVD kills the most people. This is usually due to 
and internship experiences that are not normally a myocardial infarction, or heart attack. Neverthe- 

provided with an undergraduate kinesiology less, most people who have a heart attack survive 

degree. It also requires one to pass the national it (Virani et al., 2020). For these survivors, cardiac 

examination provided by the Academy of Nutrition rehabilitation is urgently needed. 

and Dietetics. This process ensures that, when Cardiac rehabilitation is “a medically supervised 

a client is consulting an RDN, the RDN has the program that assists with recovery after a cardiac 

appropriate education and qualifications to legally event and with the prevention of disease recurrence 

and ethically make medically oriented dietary rec- and premature death” (American Association of 

ommendations. Cardiovascular & Pulmonary Rehabilitation, 2021). 

Unfortunately, at this time, anyone can legally Because most participants in cardiac rehabilitation 

claim to be a “nutritionist,” regardless of how inad- are unfit, exercise programming forms the foun- 

equate their education or training is. (An Internet dation for cardiac rehabilitation. Consequently, 



MG 292 Introduction to Kinesiology 

expertise in exercise testing, exercise prescription, National Center on Health, Physical Activity 

and CVD risk factor modification—skills taught in and Disability; clients with physical, sensory, 

most quality kinesiology undergraduate degree or cognitive limitations) 

programs—are core competencies for cardiac * ACSM/ACS Certified Cancer Exercise Trainer 
rehabilitation professionals. On the other hand, (created in collaboration with the Ameri- 
because the participants in these programs have can Cancer Society; clients who have been 
clinically significant CVD, additional expertise is affected by cancer) 
expected. Some kinesiology programs teach these * ACSM/NPAS Physical Activity in Public 
topics and some do not. For many undergraduate Health Specialist (created in collaboration 
kinesiology students, the additional skills that are with the National Physical Activity Society; 
often needed include an understanding of cardio- promotion of physical activity in public 
vascular pathophysiology, normal and abnormal 

health at local, state, or national levels) 
electrocardiographic responses to exercise, and 
cardiovascular medications. In order to be hired 

American Council on Exercise 
into a cardiac rehabilitation position, prior expe- 
rience in a program is often expected. To put this ¢ Health Coach (health and wellness coach 
into perspective, one of the prerequisites for sitting certification) 
for the Certified Cardiac Rehabilitation Professional ¢ Medical Exercise Specialist (clients who have 
examination, offered by the American Association common noncommunicable diseases such as 
of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation, cardiovascular, pulmonary, metabolic, and 
includes having at least 1,200 clinical hours in musculoskeletal conditions) 
cardiac rehabilitation. An internship or volunteer 

¢ Behavior Change Specialist (working with 
experience in a program can count toward the 

clients to evoke behavior change toward a 
1,200 hours. However, it is important to understand 

healthier lifestyle) 
that these types of jobs are often highly competi- 
tive and are frequently sought after by nurses and ¢ Sports Performance Specialist (clients with 

others with more medically oriented backgrounds. a focus on athletic performance) 

Many specialty positions have arisen that focus ¢ Weight Management Specialist (clients 
on particular populations, and many of these who need long-term weight management 
specializations have led to additional certification strategies) 
options. Because of the expertise needed to provide 

¢ Senior Fitness Specialist (clients who are 
exercise programming for a clinical population, 

older adults) 
these positions often require training or experience 
beyond what is provided for a typical bachelor’s * Youth Fitness Specialist (working with ado- 

degree in kinesiology. Most of these certifications lescents and teenagers) 

do not, however, require an additional academic ¢ Functional Training Specialist (clients desir- 
degree. Here are a few of the many specialty cer- ing to improve balance, stability, or move- 
tification possibilities: ment efficiency) 

American College of Sports Medicine One specialty position that is increasingly pop- 
ular among kinesiology students is that of strength 

¢ Clinical Exercise Physiologist (clients with and conditioning coach. Although some duties 
chronic diseases, such as cardiovascular, of this position overlap with those of a personal 
pulmonary, orthopedic, musculoskeletal, trainer, the focus here is on training athletes with 
neoplastic, immunologic, and hematologic the primary goal of improving athletic performance. 
disorders; once certified, eligible to apply Course work in most kinesiology degree programs 
for the Clinical Exercise Physiology Registry, will help prepare students for this setting, but it 
under the auspices of the Clinical Exercise will not be entirely sufficient. Even for entry-level 
Physiology Association) 

positions, job applicants need to possess a wealth 
¢ Exercise is Medicine Credential (facilitation of practical experience in athletic and strength and 

of close collaboration between health care conditioning environments. 
providers, their referred patients, and qual- In most college settings, this often means 
ified health and fitness professionals) working as an intern (often unpaid) in the athletic 

e ACSM/NCHPAD Certified Inclusive Fitness department's strength and conditioning program. 
Trainer (created in collaboration with the Individuals can further enhance their employabil- 



Chapter 11| Careers in Health and Fitness 

ity by gaining additional relevant experiences by Public Health-Oriented Careers 
working with athletes in other settings, participat- 
ing in college-level athletics, or being mentored by Historically, kinesiology has been viewed in the 

well-respected professionals in the field. Appropri- context of professions in physical education 

ate certifications are also desirable. As with other or athletics. This has begun to change, largely 
 

health and fitness professions, many certifications because noncommunicable diseases have become 

are available. One well-respected entry-level cer- an enormous contributor to premature death and 
 

tification is that of Certified Strength and disability in the United States. From your studies, 
 Condi- 

tioning Specialist (CSCS), which is offered by t you know that physical activity can be a powerful 
he 

National Strength and Conditioni tool to reduce the risk of developing NCDs, such 
ng Association. 

CSCS certification requires a bachelor’s degre as CVD. Consequently, professionals with expertise 
e, 

typically in kinesiology. in the study and promotion of physical activity are 

Many specialty positions require formal educa- increasingly sought for positions in public health 

tion beyond a bachelor’s degree in kinesiology. If settings (for examples, please reread the section 
Population-Based Settings in this chapter). 

you are interested in pursuing a specialty position, 
check with your academic advisor to determine As with a career in cardiac rehabilitation, 

described earlier, specialized training is needed. 
how you should proceed with your academic 
program. Besides taking kinesiology courses that focus on 

physical activity and health, exercise physiology, 

Kinesiology Colleagues 

Kevin Heiberger 
Kevin Heiberger is an assistant 
football performance coach at 
UCLA, where his primary responsi- 
bilities involve teaching athletes to 
improve their running speed and 
dynamic movements. After earning 
a bachelor’s degree in marketing, 
he realized that his passion was 
in strength and conditioning. He 
subsequently earned bachelor’s 
and master’s degrees in kinesi- 
ology while working as an unpaid 
strength and conditioning intern 
at a Division | university. He then 
completed two other unpaid 
internships before finally being 
hired as a performance coach 
at IMG Academy in Bradenton, 
Florida. | a AG 

Over the 4 years he spent at 
Photo cour

IMG, Heiberger developed exper- tesy of UVA Media Rela ns. 

tise as a speed and movement 
specialist while also working with well-regarded 

professionals in the field. His expertise, along with the connections he made along the way, 

resulted in his having the job he had long wanted. Although Heiberger’s path to his dream job was 

circuitous and challenging, it was not at all atypical for those who seek a career in strength and 

conditioning. 



me 204 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Professional Issues in Kinesiology 

Evidence-Based: Access for Everyone 
Most health and fitness facilities strive constantly to recruit and retain members. Even so, this 

process often overlooks one segment of the population—namely, individuals with disabilities, 

be they physical, intellectual, or another type. The U.S. Census Bureau estimates that about 19 

percent of the U.S. population has some form of disability. Thus, it makes good business sense 

to create facilities that offer inclusive programming, equipment, and accessibility for people who 

are not ambulatory. However, a survey of community fitness facilities found that, for members 

who use a wheelchair, the most common challenges were access to and free movement around 

exercise equipment, as well as full access to restrooms (Dolbow & Figoni, 2015). Other common 

challenges included not having equipment adapted for wheelchair users and not having staff with 
adequate training. These challenges are rectifiable. If you have an interest in this area, you can 
gain insight into working with differentially abled people by accessing the resources provided by the 
National Center on Health, Physical Activity and Disability and by pursuing a specialty certification 
such as that of ACSM/NCHPAD Certified Inclusive Fitness Trainer. 

Citation style: APA 
Dolbow, D.R., & Figoni, S.F. (2015). Accommodation of wheelchair-reliant individuals by community fitness 
facilities. Spinal Cord, 53, 515-519. 

and exercise testing and prescription, public CVD or the coronavirus pandemic, with the goal of 
health—oriented courses should be pursued. These identifying ways to reduce these health risks. While 
could include topics such as health behavior these areas are still very relevant, several kinesiol- 
change, health promotion, program evaluation, ogy departments that are situated within a school 
biostatistics, and epidemiology (Ainsworth & or college of public health offer the MPH degree 
Hooker, 2015). Because of this extra coursework, with a focus on physical activity and public health. 
many undergraduate kinesiology degree programs These developments have resulted in opportunities 
now offer concentrations in this area, often called for health and fitness professionals to learn how to 
“physical activity and public health” (Welk & Knud- navigate the legislative process; partner with local, 
son, 2015). This course work can help prepare you state, and federal agencies; design, implement, and 
in the short term for the Physical Activity in Public evaluate programs; and promote physical activity as 
Health Specialist certification offered by the Amer- an essential public health component. 
ican College of Sports Medicine in collaboration Besides pursuing an MPH, training as a public 
with the National Physical Activity Society. health educator may also enable you to fill this 

Nevertheless, kinesiology has yet to become a role and design programs for implementation at 
core component of the degree requirements for the community level. Job settings for public health 
accredited public health programs in colleges and educators include local health departments, non- 
universities (Ainsworth & Hooker, 2015; Council profit organizations, schools, colleges, hospitals, 
on Education for Public Health, 2018). As a result, and health insurance companies. For those wishing 
many students continue their education by pursuing to pursue a position as a public health educator, the 
a master of public health (MPH) degree after com- credential of Certified Health Education Specialist 
pleting their undergraduate degree in kinesiology. (CHES) is offered by the National Commission for 
More than 160 MPH programs are now accredited Health Education Credentialing. 
by the Council on Education for Public Health. 
Historically, the coursework associated with this Health and Fitness Director 
MPH degree typically emphasizes biostatistics, epi- 
demiology, or both. Biostatisticians use statistical The health and fitness director is a key position in 

processes and methods to analyze public health most health and fitness settings. In larger facilities, 

issues with the goal of improving public health. the health and fitness director may be part of the 
Epidemiologists typically investigate the causes and general management team and may supervise a 
patterns associated with public health issues, such as team of managers who handle specific respon- 



Chapter 11| Careers in Health and Fitness 295 i 

sibilities within departments. Examples of these Certification and Continuing Education 
management positions include directors for group 
exercise, yoga, Pilates, personal training, aquati To be hired for a position in the health and fitness 

cs, 
athletics and recreation, and youth activities. professions, you will need to fulfill specific require- 

ments in your education and training. Once you are 
hired, you will need to continue seeking informa- 

ANA dot) a tion and developing new skills because the health 
and fitness field is dynamic, and new information 

Health and fitness directors must understand the ways 
is continually becoming available. 

in which social and cultural forces affect their industry, 
Corporate, commercial, community, and popu- 

and they must know how to respond to these forces in lation-based organizations typically prefer to hire 
order to keep their programs viable. health and fitness instructors, health and fitness 

specialists, and personal trainers who hold at least 
a bachelor’s degree in either kinesiology or another 

The job description of a health and fitness 
discipline related to health and fitness. Indeed, 

director includes hiring, training, and providing 
many organizations require such a degree. This is 

support for a diverse staff of health and fitness 
a good thing because club members, employees, 

professionals, as well as support personnel such 
and patients now demand high-caliber, educated 

as custodians and equipment maintenance staff. In 
professionals with extensive knowledge of health 

addition, health and fitness directors are respon- 
and fitness. 

sible for conducting business planning, managing 
Still, for better or for worse, many people 

budgets, planning facility renovations, selecting 
employed in the health and fitness industry do 

equipment, designing and marketing programs, and 
not have a kinesiology degree. Some are not qual- 

forecasting trends in health and fitness programs. 
ified to work in this industry, whereas others may 

The director must possess a broad, interdisciplinary 
have extensive work experience and a great deal 

education that includes business planning, budget- 
of continuing education and practical training. 

ing, marketing, and staff management, as well as a 
Because of the prevalence of poorly trained and 

strong foundation in kinesiology. 
self-proclaimed fitness experts, most employers 

Health and fitness directors also need to be 
now require staff members to hold a certification 

effective leaders. Besides managing day-to-day 
from a nationally recognized organization as a 

operations, they must be capable of articulating 
condition of employment. 

a vision and motivating others to work toward 
Hundreds of certifications are available for pro- 

specific goals. They are both visionaries who keep 
fessionals in the health and fitness industry. Some 

current with the field of health and fitness and 
certifications truly identify you as being knowl- 

mentors who support staff members in pursuing 
edgeable about kinesiology and current standards 

their individual goals and aspirations. 
of professional practice; others are little more than 

Educational requirements for the health and 
moneymakers for the agency that provides them. 

fitness director position emphasize academic 
Some are highly regarded; others are not. Conse- 

degrees more than certifications. Kinesiology is 
quently, it can be a daunting challenge to decide 

an appropriate undergraduate degree, and many 
which certification(s) to pursue and, due to the 

facilities also require the health and fitness direc- 
costs involved, which ones lead to an expensive 

tor to have a graduate degree in kinesiology or 
mistake if handled poorly. 

another discipline related to health and fitness. It With this pitfall in mind, the International 
may also be desirable to have a business-related Health, Racquet & Sportsclub Association recom- 
degree or a master’s in sport management because mends that facilities hire personal trainers with 
the director focuses primarily on the administrative certifications from organizations with third-party 
and business aspects of the facility. Other require- 

accreditation. Accreditation is the process by which 
ments often include experience in a position such 

a nationally recognized accrediting agency eval- 
as health and fitness specialist or personal trainer. 

uates a credentialing program against standards 
Experience in such positions can give directors a 

expected in a legitimate credentialing process. 
better understanding of individualized program 

Consequently, a good first step toward identifying a 
design and strategies for enabling behavior change. good potential certification is to determine whether 
These job experiences can also provide valuable it has been accredited by the National Commission 
insight into the management responsibilities of 

for Certifying Agencies (NCCA). You can find out 
hiring, training, and supporting staff. 



ME 296 Introduction to Kinesiology 

by doing a web search for the phrase “fitness cre- potential certification is to gather expert opinions 

dentialing excellence.” Currently, 16 organizations by talking with your professors and with profes- 

catering to health and fitness professionals have sionals in the field. These people should be able 

been accredited: to help you determine the legitimacy of a certifi- 
cation and decide whether it will enhance your 

¢ Academy of Applied Personal Training 
marketability to potential employers. This advice 

Education is more important than evaluating certifications 
¢ ACTION Certification based on their cost. The costs can vary widely, and 
e« American College of Sports Medicine a given certification may be expensive because an 

organization is for-profit, not because it maintains 
¢ American Council on Exercise 

rigorous standards and provides professional sup- 
e Athletics and Fitness Association of America 

port. Any organization can claim to be important 
* Collegiate Strength and Conditioning and charge a lot for training, test preparation, and 

Coaches Association testing. The rigor and reputation of the certification 
e International Fitness Professionals Associ- are the important factors to consider. Some of the 

ation most widely recognized and respected certifications 

¢ National Academy of Sports Medicine come from the American College of Sports Med- 
icine (ACSM), the American Council on Exercise 

e National Council for Certified Personal 
(ACE), the National Academy of Sports Medicine 

Trainers 
(NASM), and the National Strength and Condition- 

¢ National Council on Strength and Fitness ing Association (NSCA). 
e National Exercise and Sports Trainers Asso- As you can see, you must do your research 

ciation when applying for health and fitness positions so 

e National Exercise Trainers Association that you will know what educational certifications 
and programs are credible and most desired by 

e National Federation of Professional Trainers 
specific health and fitness facilities. In addition, 

e National Strength and Conditioning Asso- be aware that certification organizations require 
ciation you to continue your education by taking recog- 

e Pilates Method Alliance nized continuing education units (CEUs) in order 

e PTA Global, Inc. to maintain certification. 
It is also essential for you to stay current with 

¢ World Instructor Training Schools 
new scientific material even after you have com- 

If you are considering a certification that has pleted your undergraduate degree. Being part of a 
not been accredited, the second step in deciding professional association can help you do so. Join- 
whether to pursue that certification is to assess the ing a professional association is therefore another 
organization providing it. This step can also be chal- important step in becoming a health and fitness 
lenging because certifications are offered by many professional. Such associations typically sponsor 
organizations, most of which purport to provide the regional and national conferences and provide 
“best” or “most comprehensive” or “most respected” journals, educational materials, and training. Many 
certification available. In addition, some legitimate also offer discounted membership rates for stu- 
certifications for specialty positions or skills are | dents. Important organizations in this profession 
desired but not yet accredited. Recall from earlier in are listed at the end of this chapter. To find out 
this chapter that the Certified Strength and Condi- about membership, publications, workshops, and 
tioning Specialist certification is recommended for regional and national conferences, contact any 
a career in the strength and conditioning field. This one of them. 
certification has been accredited, but additional 
certifications may also be desired from unaccred- 
ited agencies. For example, USA Weightlifting exists Trends and Opportunities 
to help develop Olympic-caliber weightlifters; it in Health and Fitness 
operates under the auspices of the United States 
Olympic & Paralympic Committee. While it offers In every professional field, the leaders are those 
two levels of credentialing for coaches, neither has who keep up with the latest research in the field 
been accredited by the NCCA. and with relevant social and cultural trends. They 

Consequently, the third step in identifying a continually ask questions about how the world 
. 



Chapter 11] Careers in Health and Fitness 297 iz 

Skills and Competencies Required in the Health and Fitness Profession 

Job title Evolution Job duties Skills and competencies 

Group exercise The group exercise instructor Lead a wide variety of group Musts: 
instructor position no longer exclusively exercise classes for various Certification by a nationally 

involves teaching aerobic population groups. recognized organization 
dance classes. The group Strong teaching skills 
instructor now teaches a Helpful: 
broad range of classes toa Additional certifications or 
diverse population of individ- training in specialized areas 
uals. 

Fitness instructor The fitness instructor is an Orient clients to exercise Musts: 
entry-level position in many equipment and design basic Certification by a nationally 
health and fitness facilities. programs. recognized organization 

Strong teaching skills 
Preferred: 
Bachelor's degree in a 
health- and fitness-related 
field (e.g., kinesiology, phys- 
ical education, or health 
education) 
Helpful: 
Additional certifications or 
training in specialized areas 

Health and fit- To meet the needs of a Design customized exercise Musts: 
ness specialist changing demographic of programs to meet the needs Bachelor’s or graduate 

clients who may have health of diverse participants. Con- degree in a health- and fit- 
concerns, many facilities duct fitness assessments ness-related field 
now require their fitness for the purpose of informing Certification by a nationally 
professionals to have formal program design and monitor- recognized organization 
degrees in their field and ing progress. Provide expert Preferred: 
nationally recognized certifi- guidance to assist clients in Skills and experience with 
cations. meeting their personal exer- fitness testing, exercise 

cise-related goals. Design prescription, and program 
and implement programs. planning 

Helpful: 
Additional certifications or 
training in specialized areas 

Wellness coach Having evolved from the Provide guidance to a diverse Musts: 
more traditional fitness population of individuals Bachelor's or graduate 

instructor position, the well- in areas such as behavior degree in a health- and fit- 

ness coach provides coun- change, stress management, ness-related field 
seling on a broad range of smoking cessation, weight Certification by a nationally 
health topics in addition to management, and exercise recognized organization 

conducting fitness assess- programming. Skills in counseling, behavior 

ments and designing exer- change, cultural diversity, 

cise programs. teaching, and exercise pre- 
scription 
Preferred: 
Specialized wellness coach 
certification 
Marketing and promotional 
skills 

(continued) 



Me 298 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Skills and Competencies Required in the Health and Fitness Profession (continued) 

Job title Evolution Job duties Skills and competencies 

Personal trainer This position has changed Provide ongoing support and Musts: 

from exclusively providing guidance to a diverse pop- Certification by a nationally 

individualized exercise pro- ulation of clients on topics accredited organization 

grams to providing services such as physical fitness, Counseling and teaching 

on a broad range of health weight management, stress skills 
topics to both individuals and management, and sport con- Business, marketing, sales, 
small groups. ditioning. and promotion training 

Skills and experience with 
fitness testing and exercise 
prescription 
Preferred: 
Bachelor’s or graduate 
degree in a health- and fit- 
ness-related field 
Helpful: 
Additional certifications or 
training in specialized areas 

Specialty posi- Number and types of posi- Provide specialized health Musts: 
tions tions have expanded in and fitness services to Potential graduate degree 

recent years and moved from clients with special needs. requirement 
exclusively clinical settings Examples include physical Other specific experiences 
to a variety of health and therapist and public health and skills required for each 
fitness settings. educator. type of specialist position 

Preferred: 
Additional certifications and 
licensure—may be required 
to practice in specific states 

Health and fit- This position has evolved Manage all aspects of a Musts: 
ness director from a fitness instructor who — health and fitness depart- Bachelor’s or graduate 

has additional administrative ment. Responsibilities degree in a health- and fit- 
responsibilities to a full-time include departmental lead- ness-related field 
manager who actively par- ership, staff management, Additional skills in business 
ticipates in all aspects of program planning, and all administration, management, 
personnel and facility man- aspects of business admin- marketing, and promotion 
agement. istration. Preferred: 

Previous experience as a 
health and fitness specialist 
or similar position 

around them affects their organization. This chapter KeEY PON eSS e 
is designed primarily to give you an understand- 

Health and fitness programs increasingly address 
ing of the various positions available in the health 
and fitness professions. Now that you have this dimensions of wellness beyond physical fitness. They 

understanding, you should broaden your view by draw from a more holistic, multidimensional model 

adding an understanding of the trends that affect that includes physical, intellectual, emotional, social, 
these professions. and spiritual well-being. 

T



Chapter 11| Careers in Health and Fitness 299 Zz 

As a future health and fitness professional, you (4) spiritual—a guiding sense of meaning or value 
should be aware of the ever-changing context in in life that may involve belief in some unifying or 
which these professions exist. This is a dynamic universal force; and (5) social—the ability to have 
time in the health and fitness field. Personal, social, satisfying interpersonal relationships and interac- 
cultural, and political issues exert powerful influ- tions with others (Dintiman & Greenberg, 1986) 
ences on the ways in which we view health and (see figure 11:1); 
fitness and the ways in which we work. Although In accordance with this model, worksite pro- 
it is beyond the scope of this chapter to outline all grams have evolved to provide services that not 
of these forces, this section discusses three major only help employees make changes but also sup- 
issues currently influencing the health and fitness port them in maintaining healthy lifestyle behav- 
professions: increasing interest in a multidimen- iors. Thus, besides offering employees state-of- 
sional model of wellness, emerging demographic the-art fitness facilities, many worksites now offer 
trends, and health care reform. The rise of noncom- family activities, volunteer service opportunities, 
municable diseases is an important fourth issue, and programs that facilitate personal growth and 
but it has been previously described in this chapter, improvement of communication skills. 

As facilities expand their program offerings, they 

Multidimensional Model of Wellness also expand their job descriptions. If you elect to 
focus exclusively on the physical dimension of well- 

It is a trend across all health and fitness settings that 
ness, you will continue to find many exciting job 

program offerings are being expanded to address 
opportunities. You will find even more, however, 

additional dimensions of wellness. This expansion if you embrace the challenge of becoming able to 
reflects increasing appreciation of a more holistic deliver services that address other dimensions of 
definition of health—namely, that being healthy wellness. 
involves far more than simply being physically Many health and fitness positions have already 
fit. In this view, wellness is exemplified by the expanded to involve a broader range of respon- 
pursuit of comprehensive well-being, not merely sibilities than in the past. Thus, personal trainers 
the absence of disease, infirmity, or deficiencies and health and wellness coaches continue to 
in physical fitness. The multidimensional model design exercise programs but now also help clients 
of wellness addresses at least five dimensions: (1) with stress management, personal growth, and 
physical—the ability to conduct daily tasks with involvement in social activities. Industry leaders 
vigor; (2) emotional—the ability to control emo- in all settings are looking for bright people who 
tions and express them appropriately and com- can deliver a broad range of services and integrate 
fortably; (3) intellectual—the ability to learn, grow concepts of exercise and fitness into a broader 
from experience, and use intellectual capabilities; definition of health. 

aie ST eras 

otiorn en Bo 
a iy1 0c ont 

GEUEFE] Dimensions of wellness. 



MH 300 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Multidimensional Approach to Fitness and Healing 

Cancer patients at the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), have the opportunity to meet 

with cancer exercise trainers certified by the American College of Sports Medicine. The trainers 

demonstrate simple exercises that can be done at home, design personalized exercise programs, 

and refer patients to cancer-specific yoga and group exercise classes in the community. The service, 

known as the Cancer Exercise Counseling program, is provided at the UCSF Helen Diller Family 

Comprehensive Cancer Center and is funded by grants and donations. The exercise trainers have 

worked with UCSF’s department of physical therapy and rehabilitation services to write a manual 

titled “Moving Through Cancer: A Guide to Exercise for Cancer Survivors.” Cancer exercise pro- 

grams continue to increase in popularity as new research studies confirm the relationship between 
physical activity and improved quality of life for people diagnosed with cancer (Patel et al., 2019). 

Demographics 
Demographic trends are radically redefining the aged 45 to 64 and 10 times more than the 18 to 24 
meaning of healthy lifestyles and healthy aging. category (see figure 11.2). A substantial driver of 
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the median this increase is the aging of the baby boom gen- 
age of the U.S. population increased from 23 years eration, which consists of the 77 million people 
in 1900 to 30 years in 1950, 35 years in 2000, and born in the United States between 1946 and 1964. 
38 years in 2019 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2015; 2020). Because of its sheer size, this generation has hada 
In the 2019 census, people under the age of 18 huge effect on the marketplace for the past quarter 
made up 23 percent of the total population, people century. This influence will continue for decades. 
aged 18 to 64 accounted for 61 percent, and people What might this “age wave” (Dychtwald, 1990) 
aged 65 or older made up 16 percent. Looking to mean for the health and fitness fields? What does 
the future, the distribution of ages in the United it mean when people say that baby boomers not 
States is expected to change dramatically. Over the only will grow older chronologically but also will 
next 40 years, which will likely span the entirety “age youthfully”? Will middle age be reinvented? 
of your working career, the relative percentage of What will happen when future customers, clients, 
people aged 65 or over will grow four times more and patients retire at 65 years of age and still have 
than the next-fastest-growing category of people another 25 years of living? Consider the fact that 

£fe )([ o)  

pe)o O 

Cf(2pr0heo2arm0nc  egnet ) 

—= 
<18 18 to 24 25 to 44 45 to 64 >65 

Age (years) 

GEUEEEH] Changes in the distribution of the population by age, 2020 to 2060. 
Data from U.S. Census Bureau, Demographic Turning Points for the United States: Population Projections for 2020 to 2060 (2017). https://www.census. 
gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2020/demo/p25-1144p.d f 



Chapter 11| Careers in Health and Fitness 

the percentage of people over age 85 is expected Clearly, health care reform in the United States 
to increase by 35 percent from 2020 to 2030 and to has been needed, and it needs to involve both 
increase 184 percent by 2060. These demographic disease treatment and prevention. Consequently, 
shifts will surely challenge our definition of phys- and with much fanfare and debate, then-president 
ical activity as it relates to sport, competition, Barack Obama signed into law the Affordable Care 
adventure, movement, pleasure, and health. Act in March 2010. The controversial law put into 

The demographic patterns shaping the United place comprehensive health insurance reforms, 
States are likely to produce many job opportunities. with most changes taking place by 2014. One 
In addition to the age-related changes, we will also positive consequence of the Affordable Care Act 
be a far more diverse nation in the coming years. had been a decline in the number of uninsured 
For instance, over 62 percent of the projected Americans—from about 16 percent of Americans 
increase in the population between 2020 and 2040 in 2011 (DeNavas-Walt et al., 2012) to 7.9 percent 
will be due to an increase in the Hispanic popula- in 2017 (Berchick et al., 2019). Unfortunately, the 
tion. However, the fastest rate of growth during this number of uninsured Americans began to increase 
time will be people who self-identify as multiracial, in 2018 (Berchick et al., 2019). 
who will increase by a remarkable 70 percent (U.S. Perhaps the best way to control one’s health care 
Census Bureau, 2018). costs is to stay healthy. Of course, a good way to 

The task of defining and categorizing the U.S. stay healthy is to adopt and maintain healthy lifestyle 
population into specific racial and ethnic groupings behaviors, including daily physical activity. However, 
is subject to increasing methodological, empirical, both the rising costs of medical care and the manner 
and theoretical difficulty. At the same time, demo- in which health care is paid for in the United States 
graphic trends are exerting an enormous influence have slowed the progress toward offering more 
on the ways in which many U.S. health and fitness preventive services. Health care organizations are so 
businesses are developing their strategic plans for busy developing cost-effective ways to treat people 
the next decade. Many settings are already taking who are sick that they seem unable to focus on 
advantage of this demographic shift in their hiring, developing better strategies for prevention. 
programming, and marketing practices. As a result, Providers are often more motivated to invest 
new kinesiology graduates will likely be working money in preventive services when they are confi- 
in multigenerational and multiracial work teams as dent that they will reap the benefits in future cost 
the need for new allied health professionals contin- savings. For example, consider a person who has a 
ues. For this reason, you are strongly encouraged myocardial infarction (heart attack) and is treated 
to gain expertise in understanding and working with a percutaneous coronary intervention. This 
with diverse populations. Doing so could entail, for scenario is relatively common and typically results 
example, taking academic courses related to diver- in a hospitalization cost of about $19,000, and over 
sity or pursuing an academic minor in gerontology. $60,000 if coronary artery bypass graft surgery 

is needed (Cowper et al., 2019). If the person is 

Health Care Reform employed, then a significant portion of their insur- 
ance coverage is paid by their employer. Both the 

Health care costs, which have skyrocketed over health insurance provider and the employer want 
the past decade, underlie many of the decisions to minimize the employee’s health care expenses. 
made by companies about their worksite health Employers and insurance providers are becom- 
programs. As a result, these costs may affect the ing increasingly aware that it is cheaper to keep 
types of job opportunities you will have when you employees healthy than to pay for their treatment 
begin your career. when they get sick. 

The total cost of health care in the United States Accordingly, many health insurance plans now 
is considerably higher than it is in other industri- offer their members an extensive menu of health 
alized nations, and it continues to grow. In 2010, and fitness programs free of charge. The rationale 
Americans spent $2.6 trillion on health care, an is simple: Healthy members are less expensive 
average of $8,402 per person (Kaiser Family Foun- than unhealthy members. In some cases, this effort 
dation, 2012). However, in 2018, that number had pursues the goal of improving the overall health of 
risen to $3.6 trillion, which equated to $11,172 per potential subscribers in a geographic area. In other 
person (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, cases, it is a marketing strategy aimed at increasing 
2019). Despite these enormous dollar amounts, the number of people who enroll in the health plan. 
many people in the United States have not received Today, physical activity is increasingly seen as an 
the health care they need. integral component of the nation’s health care deliv- 



MH 302 Introduction to Kinesiology 

New Technology and Innovations in Health and Fitness Products 

With the advent of cloud and GPS technology, myriad products and apps have been made available 

to measure physiological variables, sleep, and the effects of exercise or physical activity. Con- 

sider how these products may affect the fitness and health industries now and in the future. Do 

the potential benefits in terms of motivation, wellness, and performance outweigh privacy issues 

related to storing personal information on the cloud? 

ery system and a public health promotion tool. The and fitness topics. You should be able to relate to 
American College of Sports Medicine has worked with a diverse population of clients from different age 
the American Medical Association to promote physical groups and ethnic backgrounds. You can involve 
activity as another “vital sign” that physicians should yourself in a health and fitness job setting through 
monitor in checkups with patients. It is possible that an internship, cooperative education experience, 
a perspective more focused on health promotion and or work-study program to keep up to date on what 
wellness will dominate the health care system in the is happening in the field. 
future, thus giving kinesiology graduates improved Take special care in choosing elective courses in 
career opportunities. Perhaps the model hospital of your degree program, and talk with your advisor 
the future will feature on-site fitness facilities and a for assistance in doing so. If your department does 
staff of health and fitness counselors and personal not offer a course in teaching or counseling skills, 
trainers in addition to traditional medical personnel. then ask what departments on campus do offer 

Of course, health and fitness professionals must it. Alternatively, perhaps a faculty member with 
recognize that the addition of insurance-sponsored expertise in teaching health or wellness coaching 
prevention programs is not the only answer. Cre- can supervise you in an independent study. You 
ative solutions require not just providing people might also benefit from business and marketing 
with access to preventive programs and services classes. Marketing skills are important for health 
but also facilitating their participation in these and fitness professionals in our media-saturated 
programs. Encouraging people to adhere to good culture; after all, a big part of your job will be 
diets and other healthy habits, such as adopting to motivate people to take part in the programs 
a physically active lifestyle, is just the beginning. that you offer and to promote the idea of making 
The key is to develop and implement effective, healthy lifestyle changes. Again, if your department 
outcome-driven programs. does not offer a specific class in health and fitness 

marketing, look for another course on campus that 
provides general marketing information that you 

Advice for Health can apply to your discipline. What will matter most 

and Fitness Students when you interview for a job is that you have the 
knowledge and skills to do the work effectively. 

Today’s health and fitness professional must obtain Do your homework early, and make sure that you 
a broad education in several scientific, behavioral, obtain this expertise along the way. 
and humanities-based disciplines (see the job New graduates often show up for interviews 
descriptions in the Skills and Competencies sidebar excited and with degrees in hand but unprepared 
earlier in the chapter). To develop the necessary for the types of jobs available. In some cases, stu- 
skills and competencies, seek a combined degree dents interviewing for specialist positions in health 
in kinesiology and health with additional courses and fitness facilities do not have any experience 
from a wide range of areas, such as teaching, behav- leading exercise classes because they chose an area 
ior change psychology, neuroscience, social and of emphasis that dealt strictly with the biologic or 
personal media, computer technology, gerontology, scientific spheres of physical activity. Because exer- 
marketing, and the sociology of race, gender, and cise leadership courses fall within another area of 
ethnicity. You will also benefit from course work emphasis (i.e., the behavioral sphere), these students 
in theoretical kinesiology, and you can round out 

did not believe that they needed them. Learn from 
your professional practice knowledge with other 

these mistakes—don’t limit yourself to one area of 
specialized courses related to health and fitness. emphasis at the expense of gaining skills that will 

In addition, you need to gain practical experi- help you be successful in the career you want. 
ence in counseling clients on a variety of health 



Chapter 11] Careers in Health and Fitness 

Doing well academically by learning what is In addition to having the appropriate credentials 
taught and earning good grades is important, but on paper, you must demonstrate that you can apply 
it is not enough. Your academic efforts will help the skills you have learned. 
prepare you as a professional by giving you the This is a dynamic and exciting time to become 
scientific, theoretical, and practical knowledge you a health and fitness professional. Maximizing the 
need. However, when you graduate from college, Opportunities presented by your college course work 
you will compete for jobs with people who have and associated extracurricular activities will help you 
similar academic credentials as well as extensive progress toward becoming a professional in this field. 
practical experience. When hiring a new employee, Upon graduation, if you have taken these steps and 
many health and fitness facility managers will place exhibit a passion for helping others become healthier, 
equal importance on the hands-on experiences as then you will be well prepared for a rewarding career. 
on an applicant’s academic success. For this reason, 
it is critical that you obtain these experiences and 
skills in addition to your academic education. Seek CEC OUN Leeens ee ee ee 
out volunteer and extracurricular activities that give To maximize your educational experience in college, 
you hands-on, real-world experiences. If you are select a broad spectrum of elective courses in your 
uncertain how to do so or where to begin, talk with 

degree program. 
your academic advisor, kinesiology faculty members, 
and professionals in the careers you are seeking. 

In addition, read the relevant health and fitness Wrap-Up 
journals and industry publications. Many of these 
publications are available through the associations This chapter describes the health and fitness field 
listed at the end of this chapter. Most are also avail- and summarizes the types of settings and jobs that 
able to students at substantially reduced rates, and are available for health and fitness professionals. It 
some are even provided free of charge to health and also offers insights into current and future trends 
fitness professionals. A number of online resources in health and fitness and describes ways in which 
are available for health and fitness professionals these trends do and will affect the field. Return now 
who wish to share knowledge and ideas. Many have to the chapter-opening scenarios. Consider how 
a membership subscription fee but in return offer professionals in health and fitness careers can help 
continuing education and community workshops. each of the individuals described there. The world of 

Given the competitive nature of the job market, health and fitness is ever changing, which is partly 
you must maximize your educational experience what makes this profession dynamic and exciting. 
while in college. Work with your advisor to create a If you are considering a career in the health and 
degree plan that will prepare you for the job market fitness professions, learn as much as you can about 
now and in the future. Besides taking the courses them. It is never too early to begin to tailor your edu- 
required by your major, select elective courses that cation to your personal passion. Consider industry 

prepare you for the type of job you want. Take trends as you complete this phase of what should 
advantage of as many internship and community be an ongoing educational process. This discussion 
service learning experiences as possible. Again, a about the health and fitness professions should serve 
degree in a health and fitness discipline alone will only as the starting point from which you launch 
likely be insufficient to get you the job you want. your process of discovery. Enjoy the journey. 

_MORE INFORMATION ON CAREERS IN HEALTH AND FITNESS 

Organizations 
American College of Sports Medicine 

American Council on Exercise 

American Public Health Association 

IDEA Health & Fitness Association 

International Health, Racquet & Sportsclub Association 

Medical Fitness Association 



Ge 304 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Medical Wellness Association 

National Academy of Sports Medicine 

National Commission for Health Education Credentialing 

National Strength and Conditioning Association 

National Wellness Institute 

SHAPE America (Society of Health and Physical Educators) 

Society for Public Health Education 

Wellness Coaches USA 

Journals 
ACSM’s Health & Fitness Journal 

American Journal of Health Behavior 

American Journal of Health Education 

American Journal of Health Promotion 

American Journal of Public Health 

Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews 

Health Education & Behavior 

The Health Educator 

Health Promotion Practice 

International Journal of Sport Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism 

Journal of Nutrition 

Journal of Physical Activity and Health 

Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 

Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 

Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport 

Strength and Conditioning Journal 

Translational Journal of the American College of Sports Medicine 

REVIEW QUES TONS 
1. Identify program objectives and target markets for each of the following health and fitness 

settings: (a) worksite, (b) commercial, (c) community, (d) clinical, and (e) population. 

2. Compare the sales-based and retention-based business models for commercial health and 
fitness facilities. 

3. Describe typical job duties for the following health and fitness positions: (a) group exercise 
instructor, (b) fitness instructor, (c) health and fitness specialist, (d) health and wellness 
coach, (e) personal trainer, and (f) health and fitness director. 

4, How will demographic trends in the U.S. population (e.g., aging baby boomers) affect the 
health and fitness professions? 

5. List the types of knowledge and the skills and abilities that you need to obtain in order 
to be competitive in the health and fitness job market. How do certifications fit into these 
qualifications? 

6. List past and future trends in health and fitness programs, equipment, resources, and settings. 

as | KProp eC| » ) Go to HKPropel to complete the activities for this chapter. 



Careers in Medicine 
and Allied Health 

Chad Starkey 

In this chapter, we will 

acquaint you with the wide range ofp rofessional opportunities itf  

medicine and allied health, — 

familiarize you with the purpose and ape = work done by. : 
professionals in diagnosis and peepee! interventions, including 
exercise, ee = 

inform you about the ediications! requirements and exper ncesn eeded 

to become an active, competent professional |in  the area, = e 

help you identify whether one oft hese Professions fitsy our skill 

ere and professional desires. Se : 



While going iin  for a layup, a paskeeat player has her eeea ko out from unde 
athletic trainer arrives on the scene and finds that the player has a fractured right wris From 
here, the athletic trainer will guide the immediate care of this athlete and refer hertoa ge 
physician assistant, or physical therapist who will Bee es 
an intervention program to enable her to 
safely return to sport. 

Following a stroke, a Bayeareld chief 
financial officer is recovering from surgery. 
Along his road to recovery, he will meet 
physicians, physician assistants, physical 
therapists, occupational therapists, and 
cardiovascular rehabilitation specialists. 
Each of these professionals will assist in 
restoring his function, ultimately allowing 
him to return to his career. 

Surgeons repair an infant’s club foot, but 
the child exhibits a delay in walking upright. 

__ A physician refers the child to a physical 
cee therapist for the rehabilitation necessary to 
achieve normal development. An orthotist or 

© Human Kinetics 

These scenarios depict situations faced by medical receive advanced graduate training beyond an 
and allied health professionals every day in work undergraduate major like kinesiology that builds 
settings such as hospitals, laboratories, physician on their knowledge of human anatomy, human 
offices, clinics, and sports medicine facilities. physiology, exercise physiology, neurology, and 
Although their patients and clients may differ, biomechanics. The scientific study of physical 
these professionals—including athletic trainers, activity makes kinesiology a strong major for stu- 
clinical exercise physiologists, chiropractors, den- dents seeking admission to graduate programs in 
tists, occupational therapists, physicians, physician allied health professions described in this chapter, 
assistants, physical therapists, and therapeutic as well as primary care medicine (MD/DO) or 
recreation specialists—all incorporate some form dentistry (DDS). 
of diagnostics and apply exercise and movement Almost all medical and allied health professions 
experiences to improve a person’s physical func- have a diagnostic component and a therapeutic 
tioning. Many allied health professionals in this exercise Or intervention component, although the 
sphere help people restore lost function (through proportion of each component may vary. Diagnos- 
rehabilitative therapeutic exercise) or acquire skills tics are important because they identify the physi- 
and functions considered normal or expected for ological, anatomical, or biomechanical limitations 
specialized fitness (through habilitative therapeutic that must be addressed. Interventions are then used 
exercise). Medical and allied health professionals to correct the problem. 

MEE 306 



Chapter 12| Careers in Medicine and Allied Health 

The Diagnostic Process process to decrease errors and improve the 
efficiency of care. 

In the most basic form, diagnosis is the process 
of collecting and anal ¢ Use informatics. Caregivers should gather, 

yzing information and then 
comparing the findi process, and analyze a range of data (e.g., 

ngs to norms to identify if a 
problem exists and, patient records, patient outcomes, satis- 

if so, the nature and potential 
causes of th faction surveys) to support individual and 

at problem. In the context of allied 
health, d operational decision making. 

iagnosis is identifying a person’s current 
health and well-being and matching the person’s You will probably be introduced to some of 
current level of function to their wants and needs. these core competencies during your under- 

To determine a diagnosis, the clinician will graduate education. You will become more fully 
conduct a patient interview (history-taking) to immersed in them when you begin professional 
identify any current limitations or symptoms, obtain training and experience to enter a medical or allied 
a personal and family medical history, conduct a health profession. 
physical examination that assesses the current level 
of physical function, and order laboratory, imag- 
ing, or clinical testing if needed. As the clinician Integrating Exercise 
works through the diagnostic process, a series of Into Medicine and Allied Health 
conditions or problems are ruled in or ruled out 
to derive the final diagnosis. Many medical and allied health professionals 

After the clinician derives a diagnosis, a plan of design and implement therapeutic exercise pre- 

care is developed that identifies one or more inter- scriptions to restore or improve motor function 

ventions to correct the problem. On the medical to a level that enables people to reach personal 

side of the allied health spectrum, such as physician or occupational goals unencumbered by physical 

assistant, the intervention may be entirely medic- limitations. Recall from chapter 1 that exercise is 

inal. Other professions described in this chapter prograinmed physical activity. Medical and allied 

tend to incorporate therapeutic agents (e.g., heat, health professionals have additional training 

cold, electrical stimulation), manual therapy, and beyond undergraduate kinesiology to prescribe 

therapeutic exercises into the patient’s plan of care. specific exercise that takes into account patho- 

The clinician should then assess the effectiveness mechanical problems people have resulting from 

of these interventions. disease, injury, or disability. To develop therapeutic 
goals, clinicians must call on their knowledge of the 

A set of core competencies for those who pro- 
effects of exercise on the muscular, nervous, skel- 

vide patient care has been developed by the Health 
and Medicine Division (formerly the Institute of etal, and cardiovascular systems and relate those 

effects to the patient’s needs and expectations. 
Medicine) of the National Academies of Sciences, 

Depending on the patient, the workplace, and the 
Engineering, and Medicine (Greiner & Knebel, 

conditions being treated, therapeutic goals may 
2003). The competencies are as follows: 

include restoring muscular function and strength, 
¢ Provide patient-centered care. As described joint range of motion, proprioception, cardiovascu- 

in the next section, caregivers should respect lar and pulmonary function, or metabolic function 
patients’ differences, their values, and their so that the patient can participate in activities that 
need to improve function and overall quality he or she deems important. 
of life. 

¢ Work in interdisciplinary teams. Patients are Reassessing “Disability” 
treated by a variety of medical and health 

Historically, health care and medicine tended to 
care personnel, and this team should com- 

focus on what patients and clients were unable to 
municate and work in unison in order to 

do as the result of injury, illness, or inactivity. This 
provide continuous and reliable care. 

focus on limitations, reflected in the term disabil- 
¢ Employ evidence-based practice. Caregivers ity, carries a stigma that emphasizes the negative 

should incorporate patient care techniques aspects of the person’s state of well-being. In 2002, 
that have been scientifically validated. the World Health Organization (WHO) developed 

° Apply quality improvement. Caregivers a system that places the emphasis on what the 

should evaluate the health care delivery patient can do—the International Classification 



lg 308 Introduction to Kinesiology 

of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF) Kinds of Therapeutic Exercise: 
(World Health Organization, 2002). The ICF system Rehabilitation and Habilitation 
incorporates both the medical approach of resolv- 
ing pathology and the social model of reducing Therapeutic exercise uses a systematic and scientific 

a condition’s negative effect on the person’s life application of exercise and programmed physical 

(figure 12.1). This model illustrates the relationship activity to either develop or restore muscular strength, 

between function and disability as the result of endurance, or flexibility; neuromuscular coordina- 

the interactions between health conditions (injury tion; cardiovascular efficiency; or other health and 

and disease) and contextual factors. Examples of performance factors. In practice, therapeutic exer- 

contextual factors include external environmental cise is aimed at improving or restoring the quality 

factors (e.g., social attitudes), physical characteris- of life. We draw a distinction between these two 
tics of the places where the person lives and works, aspects of therapeutic exercise in this chapter in 

and personal factors (e.g., gender, profession, life order to help you understand the different types of 

experiences). professional work associated with this area. 

Therapeutic exercise specialists either help oth- 
erwise healthy people reach the level of activity 
they want or need in order to function (habilitative _KEY POIN, 2 2 ee eee 
therapeutic exercise) or they help people who are Therapeutic exercise can be classified as either rehabil- 
ill or injured to return to their prior level of function itative (restoring lost function) or habilitative (helping 
(rehabilitative therapeutic exercise). to acquire normal function). 

Health condition 
(disorder or di sease) 

&. 
SVsE G 
. 
‘=! eee 

A 

: | 
er wy $ 

Body functions Casvess Activity a 
saamsamp Participation 

and structure 

& ee 
iy 

BE: 

SEW WSh  

Environmental Personal 
factors factors 

Contextual factors 

GET international Classification of Functioning, Di Sability, and Health. The ICF focuses on the person’s 
level of function and identifies interventions that maximize function and lead to a more individualized course of 
care. Thus, activity (function) is the core of the model. 
Reprinted from Towards a Common Language for Functioning, Disability and Health: The International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health 
page 18, Copyright 2002, World Health Organization. http://www.who.int/classifications/icf/training/icfbeginnersguide. pdf 



Chapter 12| Careers in Medicine and Allied Health 

Broadly speaking, rehabilitation describes pro- with a spinal cord injury, he or she would need 
cesses and treatments (interventions) that restore habilitative care. A physical therapist who tries to 

"Skills or function that were previously acquired correct congenital postural problems is also prac- 
but have been lost because of injury, disease, or ticing habilitative therapeutic exercise because it 
behavior such as voluntary inactivity. If you have involves bringing the client to a level of functioning 
ever torn a muscle or broken a bone, then you not previously attained. 
know the value of rehabilitation in helping you Clearly, health and fitness programs designed 
regain lost functions. Although interventions can for unfit populations may involve habilitative ther- 
involve a variety of measures—for example, ice, apeutic exercise because the populations served 
heat, electricity, ultrasound, manual therapy, and are usually performing at levels below what is con- 
psychological counseling—we focus in this chap- sidered normal, and they may not have previously 
ter on interventions that rely heavily on physical attained the level of health or fitness desired. The 
activity. professional opportunities in health and wellness 

Rehabilitation specialists need a thorough and fitness were addressed in chapter 11, so we 
knowledge of the pathological aspects of injury do not discuss them again here. We do, however, 
and disease, of the limitations that they impose on consider other types of professional services that 
human performance, and of the types of treatments include habilitative and rehabilitative therapeutic 
required to meet the patient’s functional needs. exercise. 
Because people are more than just muscles and Each of the professions described in this chapter 
bones, rehabilitation specialists must also take into emphasizes the importance of preventing injury 
account the psychological and social effects of the and disease. An athletic trainer, for example, helps 
injury, the patient’s personal goals and expecta- identify musculoskeletal problems such as muscle 
tions, and the course of care leading to recovery. weakness, flexibility limitations, balance distur- 
One example of rehabilitative therapeutic exercise bances, and medical conditions that could predis- 
can be found in the regimen used by an athletic pose an athlete to injury or even death. Similarly, 
trainer to restore a football running back’s injured a physical therapist may assess a person’s posture, 
knee so that he can return to competition. or evaluate a worker’s technique for lifting heavy 

The rehabilitation process includes habilitation, objects, in order to prevent job-related injuries. Pre- 
the processes and treatments that lead to the acqui- ventive medicine is also practiced by a clinical exer- 
sition of skills and functions that are normal and cise physiologist who performs electrocardiograms 
expected for someone based on their age and status and exercise stress tests in order to identify people 
(Olivares et al., 2011). The standards or expectations at risk of experiencing a heart attack. By devel- 
that signal a need for habilitation may differ vastly oping appropriate exercise programs to remedy 
for persons of the same age. For example, we would such problems, these specialists help reduce the 
expect physical performance standards for lawyers likelihood of specific injuries and diseases. 
to differ from those of professional athletes. A 
lawyer who is physically fit according to the defini- 
tion presented in chapter 2 is probably not in need SKY COIN SS re 
of habilitation; her state of fitness is desirable for “An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.” In 
good health, and she does not need special physical this spirit, both rehabilitative and habilitative therapeu- 
abilities for any rigorous occupation. In contrast, an tic exercises focus on developing the body’s systems 
athlete who is fit but lacks the advanced cardiore- so that injury or disease is less likely. 
spiratory endurance or strength to perform the tasks 

needed in his sport is a candidate for habilitation 
that involves intensive conditioning, training, and Although preventive therapeutic exercise pro- 
other skill-specific exercise. grams are usually habilitative, they may sometimes 

In both rehabilitative and habilitative therapeutic be considered rehabilitative. Habilitative thera- 
exercise, the clinician must consider any perma- peutic exercise is preventive because bringing a 

nent disability or impairment, such as blindness, person’s physical state up to expected standards 

amputation, or paralysis, that a person may have. reduces his or her risk of injury or illness. Reha- 

For example, a paraplegic person’s functional loss bilitative therapeutic exercise may also be preven- 

of use of the lower extremities would not call for tive—specifically, by restoring a patient’s physical 

rehabilitation, but if that person lacked upper body skills and functions, rehabilitation reduces his or 

strength relative to what is considered normal her risk of reinjury and of other types of injuries. 



El 310 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Considering a Career in Medicine or Allied Health? 

All medical and allied health professionals discussed in this chapter must work closely with people. 

Clinicians interact daily with a number of clients or patients and routinely discuss intervention 

plans with colleagues and other physical activity professionals. Do you enjoy contact with people? 

Do you have good communication skills? Good problem-solving skills? A strong knowledge of 

anatomy, physiology, and biomechanics? If you are considering a career in allied health, what are 
the areas in which you might need to seek out further development? 

Rehabilitative Therapeutic Exercise limb’s functionality, the resulting disuse may affect 
both the limb itself and the activity of the entire 

Physical dysfunction is characterized by an inability 
body, thus perhaps degrading the efficiency of the 

to use one or more limbs or the torso in a manner 
heart and lungs. Perhaps you have experienced this 

that is meaningful and useful to the person. If you 
effect after injuring a bone or joint; after regaining 

have ever broken an ankle or sprained the liga- 
full motion, you may have noticed that running up 

ments of your wrist, then you have experienced 
a flight of stairs or playing basketball left you more 

physical dysfunction. When a person experiences 
winded than it would have before your injury. 

physical dysfunction due to a traumatic injury, 
Therefore, the goal of orthopedic rehabilitation 

congenital defect, or disease, a physical rehabil- 
programs is twofold: to restore symptom-free 

itation specialist can help that person to regain 
movement and to restore the function of the car- 

the use of the affected body part or compensate 
diopulmonary system. Restoring the function of a 

for its disability. Physical rehabilitation specialists 
limb consists of increasing joint range of motion, 

include physical therapists, occupational thera- 
increasing muscular strength and endurance, reed- 

pists, and athletic trainers; they work closely with 
ucating neuromuscular pathways, and building 

other health care professionals such as physicians, 
cardiovascular endurance. Clinicians involved in 

nurses, and dietitians. 
this type of rehabilitation use both passive and 
active exercise to restore limb function. The next 

BREE ON coe seen een ee step involves strength and muscular endurance 
training, which protects the limb. These exercises 

Restoring physical function often involves both passive may be augmented by various forms of heat, cold, 
intervention (e.g., heat, cold, manual therapy, electrical electrical stimulation, therapeutic ultrasound, and 
stimulation) and active intervention (e.g., exercises to manual therapy. Throughout this process, the clini- 
improve strength, range of motion, and balance). cian tries to maintain the patient’s level of cardio- 

vascular endurance. Most types of neuromuscular 
rehabilitation occur in outpatient physical therapy 

Exercise Therapy for Rehabilitation clinics, hospitals, and athletic training clinics. 

of Musculoskeletal Injuries Exercise Therapy for the Rehabilitation 
The muscles and the nervous system can be pre- of Athletic Injuries 
vented from functioning properly by a stroke, 

At some point or other, you have either experienced 
spinal cord injury, back problem, or other type of 

or witnessed an athletic injury. Perhaps you broke 
injury, whether due to an accident in an automobile 

a finger while participating in a sport or anxiously 
or in an industrial, sport, or home setting. Physical 

waited during a time-out to find out how seriously 
activity, of course, carries the risk of trauma—for 

your favorite football player was injured. Almost 
example, repetitive motions that lead to neuromus- 

immediately after a sport injury, the athlete’s reha- 
cular trauma. Injury to a muscle, joint, or bone not 

bilitation begins, and restoring the body part to its 
only affects the traumatized tissues but also may 

previous level of function is only one part of the 
lead to immobilization and decreased physical 

process. Once the limb begins to regain strength, 
activity, which can cause more widespread prob- 

range of motion, and neuromuscular coordina- 
lems in neuromuscular function and cardiovascular 

tion, the athlete must be reintegrated into athletic 
endurance. For example, when an injury inhibits a 

activity. This sport-specific functional progression 



Chapter 12| Careers in Medicine and Allied Health 311 

is a unique aspect of athletic rehabilitation. It tear, part of the rehabilitation process must focus 
requires that the traditional rehabilitation proto- on restoring lost function. Prehabilitation involves 
col be merged with the skills and tasks needed to developing as much strength and range of motion 
compete in a sport. as possible before surgery. As a result, the patient 

Sports medicine is an aspect of allied health emerges from surgery having already regained 
that is exclusively dedicated to preventing, treating, some function on which to build. This approach 
and rehabilitating athletic injuries. It is distinguished is also used in some cases to strengthen the heart 
from other aspects of therapeutic exercise in that it and improve the circulation of people who will 
uses rehabilitation programs that are more aggres- undergo cardiac surgery. 
sive than those used for the general population. 
The spectrum of sports medicine is broad, and it Exercise Therapy for Rehabilitation 
encompasses a range of medical and allied health of Postsurgical Trauma 
professions that exceed the scope of this text. Stu- Although surgery is performed to restore a person’s 
dents who are interested in sports medicine careers health and function, the process of surgery itself 
should explore the sections of this chapter that has detrimental effects on the body. The incision 
address athletic training and physical therapy, as affects the involved muscles, nerves, and tissues, 
well as other subdisciplines of kinesiology and med- and the decreased activity associated with recovery 
ical fields that contribute to sports medicine teams. leads to decreased muscle mass and function and 

decreased cardiovascular efficiency. Although this 
effect is most evident when surgery involves the 

SITE Ub at i a 
limbs, the heart and lungs are also affected. Just as 

Sports medicine is a generic term that refers to the skeletal muscle wastes away when it is not used, 
practice of medicine, the art of rehabilitation, and the cardiac muscle responds similarly. Therefore, in 
sciences that relate to preventing, treating, and reha- most cases, people recovering from long-term dis- 
bilitating athletic injuries (Prentice, 2015). ability must participate in neuromuscular rehabili- 

tation to restore normal cardiopulmonary function. 

No longer unique to the sports medicine setting, Exercise Therapy in Cardiopulmonary 
a new form of therapeutic exercise has emerged Rehabilitation 
from this area: prehabilitation. Whereas rehabil- 

Diseases of the cardiopulmonary system include 
itation occurs following an injury or surgery, pre- coronary artery disease, arrhythmia, hypertension, 
habilitation occurs following the injury but before heart attack, and emphysema. Collectively, these 
surgery. When a physician deems that surgery is diseases constitute the leading cause of death and 
necessary for an orthopedic injury such as an ACL long-term disability among adults in the United 

Professional Issues in Kinesiology : 

Overload: Selecting Progressive Training for Recovery From Injury 
The overload principle in rehabilitation refers to the intensity of motion and exercise used to safely 

stress the body’s tissues, especially the muscles. Healthy, active people require a greater amount 

of stress than those who are injured or who lead a sedentary life. Historically, the initial manage- 

ment of acute orthopedic injuries involved immobilizing the body part, a technique that caused 

atrophy and reduced range of motion. Recognizing that immobilization is often counterproductive, 

the trend now is to encourage placing gentle loads on the tissues immediately after an injury.* In 

this case, simple movement of the affected joint provides the amount of stress needed to produce 

overload. As the patient progresses through the healing phases, the amount of stress placed on 

the tissues is increased, thus increasing strength and range of motion. 

Citation style: AMA 
1. Bleakley CM, Glasgow P MacAuley DC. PRICE needs updating, should we call the POLICE? Br J Sports Med. 

2012; 46(4):220-221. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2011-090297 



Mg 312 Introduction to Kinesiology 

States. Undiagnosed heart disease is also a leading K=EY Ol e 
cause of death among young athletes (Maron et Because of the nature of the diseases being treated, 
al., 2016). Early identification of people at risk for 

a physician supervises most cardiopulmonary rehabil- 
these conditions, followed by intervention, reduces 

itation programs. 
the likelihood of their occurrence and increases the 
chance of survival following an episode. 

Working closely with a physician, a profes- Cardiovascular exercises that improve the effi- 
sional involved in exercise therapy participates in ciency of the heart and lungs include breathing 
planning, implementing, and supervising physical exercises, walking, running, swimming, and resis- 
activity programs that are designed to help restore tance exercises such as weight training. These 
individuals to normal function. Therapeutic exer- exercises are prescribed at progressive levels of 
cise specialists must be aware of certain conditions intensity and duration. The patient’s progress is 
that can make rehabilitative exercise a potentially monitored by means of diagnostic tests such as 
deadly activity. Asthma, for example, can be dan- stress testing, VO,max testing, electrocardiograms, 
gerous because the lungs cannot exchange oxygen and echocardiograms, which allow caregivers to 
and carbon dioxide at the rate needed to support adapt the level of activity as needed. Cardiac stress 
the body’s metabolism during exercise. Because tests and other diagnostic tests are usually con- 
the risk is greatest when exercise occurs in a hot, ducted in a hospital or other medical environment. 
dry environment, therapeutic exercise specialists A cardiovascular exercise program is usually imple- 
who treat asthmatic clients prescribe regimens that mented in a clinic, health club, or wellness center; 
the client can tolerate more easily, such as aquatic the patient is also given an independent program 
exercise routines. prescription for home use. For a high-risk patient 

4e s 

Therapeutic interventions can take place in many settings with varied populations. 
© Human Kinetics 



Chapter 12 |C areers in Medicine and Allied Health 

in a cardiopulmonary rehabilitation program, a forms of psychotherapy (Sims et al., 2006). In the 
licensed physician must supervise all diagnostic healthy population, aerobic exercise can prevent 
tests and exercise prescriptions. the onset of some types of psychological maladies; 

for people who have such conditions, exercise can 
Exercise Therapy for Rehabilitation often be considered a form of treatment. 
of Older Populations 

People are living longer, and the percentage of the 
population aged 65 or over continues to increase. Per eet Ne eer eee eee 
As people age, the natural decrease in strength and Exercise is as important for the mind as it is for the 
flexibility and the increase in age-related skeletal body. Improving one’s physical health through exercise 
diseases (e.g., arthritis) often hinder the quality of also improves one’s mental state. 
life. As we saw in chapter 2, the loss of the ability to 
perform activities of daily living can have profound 
physical and emotional effects on people’s lives. Providers of mental health care often prescribe 

In addition, as a person enters the later years, the exercise regimens as part of their patients’ ther- 

body’s aerobic ability decreases and the percentage apy programs. The older population referred to in 

of body fat increases, thus reducing one’s capacity the preceding section can also gain psychological 

to do physical work. benefits from exercise. Elderly people who engage 

Various forms of therapeutic exercise designed in physical activity exhibit fewer signs of depres- 

to increase strength, slow the loss of flexibility, sion, enhanced self-image, better physical health, 

and improve cardiovascular condition can delay and improved morale, all of which lead to a better 

the onset of aging-related problems and minimize quality of life (Knapen et al., 2014). Exercise is also 

their effects, thereby helping seniors to regain or included in many smoking and alcohol cessation 

maintain independent, active lives and improve programs, although scientific data have yet to show 

cognitive function (Laitman & John, 2015). Pro- that this is effective (Ussher et al., 2019). 

grams that involve physical activity can decrease 
blood pressure, control cholesterol, and reduce Habilitative Therapeutic Exercise 
the risks of stroke and heart attack; they may also 

Habilitative exercises help bring people in line with 
lower the risk of certain types of cancer. 

established physical standards. The goal of this type 
At the same time, exercise in the older popula- 

of therapeutic exercise is to help people reach the 
tion is often a double-edged sword. Although phys- 

expected level of physical fitness for their demo- 
ical activity is needed to maintain an appropriate 

graphic classification. Throughout this text, we have 
level of fitness, the body is less capable of with- 

described the relationship of physical activity to 
standing the forces of exercise. Therefore, clinicians 

health, as well as the kinesiologist’s role in improving 
working with clients who have arthritis, for exam- 

health. Many of the practices of health and fitness 
ple, must remember that their clients’ joints cannot professionals described in chapter 11 also meet the 
tolerate the physical stresses of extensive walking, definition of habilitative therapeutic exercise. The fol- 
jogging, or running. These clinicians must modify lowing sections describe some of the areas in which 
their exercise programs to minimize the amount therapeutic exercise is used for habilitative purposes. 
of force exerted on the joints. Water aerobics is a 
good alternative for maintaining cardiovascular Exercise Therapy for Specialized Habilitation 
fitness without further injuring the joints. 

Although not recognized as such, specialized 
habilitation is the most common form of habilita- 

Exercise Therapy for Improving Mental Health 
tive therapeutic exercise. Specialized habilitation 

The physical benefits of exercise should now be involves bringing specific groups of people in line 
apparent to you. However, one aspect of physical with standards that exceed rather than merely meet 
activity is often overlooked—namely, its psycholog- those of the general population. These standards 
ical and emotional benefits. Exercise is a wonderful might include, for instance, running a 5-minute 
way to reduce stress and unwind from the toils of mile, having a body mass index within a certain 
life. People who engage in regular physical activity range, or being able to lift a certain amount of 
tend to sleep better and suffer fewer emotional dis- weight. Specialized habilitative therapeutic exercise 
orders than those who do not engage in such activ- takes place in settings such as preseason sport 
ity. In fact, 20 to 30 minutes of aerobic exercise can training camps, military boot camps, and police 
produce changes that are on a par with standard and firefighter academies. 



Ba 314 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Kinesiology Colleagues | 2H | 

Dustin Grooms 

Dustin Grooms had the opportu- 
nity to serve as an intern athletic 
trainer for a professional football 
team. During this experience, he 
assisted with the rehabilitation 
of a quarterback who had sus- 
tained a torn anterior cruciate 
ligament (ACL). He noticed that 
although the intervention focused 
on the knee, subtle differences 
appeared in how the patient 
moved his leg. He began to 
wonder if injury to the ACL affects 
how the brain processes informa- 
tion to and from the knee. 

While earning his doctorate in 
neuroscience, Grooms worked 
with colleagues to study how 
the brain processes information © OhioUnivers—iC otlyle g©e  of of Health Science
from the knee in people who — Mission s andP rofessions/Laurey Dickey with per- 
have intact ACLs versus those 
who have torn an ACL. Using a 
special form of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the team identified definite changes in how 
the brain processes information following an ACL tear. The results of this research have led to 
improvements in rehabilitation (and subsequent function) for people who suffer ACL tears by 
reeducating and remolding their brains to function as they did prior to injury. This approach may 
also be an important step toward preventing ACL injuries. 

Exercise specialists who work in this area must approaches are hazardous and potentially deadly. 
fully understand the muscular and cardiovascular Fad dieting, exercise addiction, and distorted body 
capabilities needed by people in these special image have reached almost epidemic proportions 
groups. Often, the exercise specialist has a pro- among females of high school and college age. 
fessional background in the specialty area. For Medical conditions associated with such obsessions 
example, a former baseball player with a degree are increasing at alarming rates; this is especially 
in kinesiology might specialize in organizing true for anorexia and bulimia (Erskine et al., 2016). 
habilitative exercise regimens for spring training At the other end of the spectrum, the overweight, 
camps. Such experience can help keep the exercise sedentary portion of the U.S. population practices 
program in line with physical expectations for the lifestyles that predispose people to cardiovascular 
players involved. disease and diabetes. Meanwhile, the mass media 

bombard us with conflicting and confusing infor- 
Exercise Therapy for Habilitation mation about which diets do—and do not—work. 
of Overweight and Obese Populations These contradictions leave many Americans unclear 

Physical fitness, exercise, and weight loss are about what is meant by healthy eating. 

controversial American obsessions. Many people Therapeutic exercise that is used to control 
overemphasize weight loss, while others ignore weight and body mass is considered habilitative 
all healthy guidance on diet and exercise. Both because of its role in bringing people in line with 



Chapter 12| Careers in Medicine and Allied Health 

established standards. Promoting a healthy life- PRR OSee 
style and decreasing the incidence of disease also 
require proper nutr During the industrial age, a larger proportion of the 

itional and exercise counseling. 
Therefore, specialists such as exercise population engaged daily in strenuous physical activ- 

 physiolo- 
gists, strength and conditioning specialists, and ity. Today’s information age has created a relatively 
personal trainers work in cooperation with physi- sedentary population. Even casual exercise can offer 
cians, registered dietitians, counselors, and other a more balanced lifestyle. 
professionals to develop and implement programs 
that help people return to normal, functional, 
healthy li Research has shown that exercise can help 

festyles. 
prevent disease and enable people to reach their 

Exercise Therapy for Habilitation maximum life expectancy. Allied health profes- 
sionals play an important role in helping people 

of Children With Developmental Problems 
to achieve healthy standards of physical fitness 

In the not-too-distant past, children born with cer- by introducing them to exercise through hospi- 
tain physical conditions faced a life with functional tal-based fitness centers, commercial gymnasiums 
limitations and participation restrictions. Now, and fitness centers, employer-based wellness 
however, early identification of specific conditions centers, and community-based nonprofit agencies. 
can be followed by appropriate intervention to 
provide countless people with the opportunity to 
have a more active life. Medical and Allied Health Settings 

The goal of this type of habilitative exercise 
Medical and allied health professionals work in a 

is to help the child adapt to, or compensate for, 
variety of settings, including inpatient facilities (e.g., 

functional anatomical and physiological deficits. In 
hospitals, residential facilities), private practices, out- 

certain cases, the underlying condition may have 
patient clinics (e.g., physical therapy offices, athletic 

been surgically corrected. Other cases may involve 
training clinics), and even clients’ homes. Some are 

teaching the child how to use a prosthetic device 
employed by other people, and some run their own 

or how to perform basic skills such as rolling over, 
private practices. Although the decision to pursue a 

walking, or eating. For example, exercise therapy 
given profession in the sphere of health may dictate 

may be used to strengthen the muscles in children 
the setting in which you work, you may still have 

with cerebral palsy, thereby improving their walk- 
opportunities to work with professionals from a wide 

ing performance. range of work settings. Most health care facilities use a 
Therapists who work with children face the 

team approach in which representatives from several 
prospect of both unique rewards and unique chal- 

professions collaborate to plan and deliver patient 
lenges. The unique challenges with this population care. This team approach, along with professional 
include communication between therapist and freedom and the wide range of possible specializa- 
child, home care problems, and schooling issues. 

tions (e.g., emergency, geriatrics, neurology, ortho- 
Nevertheless, the ultimate goal of habilitative reg- paedics, pediatrics, rehabilitation, sports) in a variety 
imens for these children is to promote physical, of settings are all attractive features of these careers. 
social, and cognitive development at a rate that is 
near the norm for their age group. 

Inpatient Facilities 
Exercise Therapy for Habilitation Rehabilitation hospitals provide specialized care 
for General Fitness aimed at returning people to their maximum level 

Given all the benefits of exercise that are described of function. People who have a severe condition 
(e.g., brain or spinal cord trauma) or are recuper- 

in this text and that are generally known, why 

doesn’t everyone exercise? Although more people ating from severe disease may require a long-term 
stay in a rehabilitation facility. Custodial care 

are now regularly exercising than ever before, 

most of the U.S. population still has a sedentary facilities such as nursing homes provide services to 
help with activities of daily living and to meet peo- 

lifestyle. No single factor is fully to blame for the 
ple’s specific medical needs. In these two types of 

resulting lack of exercise, but contributors include 
inpatient facilities, the level of a patient’s function 

the longtime popularity of television and the recent 
usually dictates the degree of coordinated effort 

growth of computer use. 
that must be arranged by physicians, rehabilitation 
specialists, and social services personnel. 



ma 316 Introduction to Kinesiology 

In addition to having the other skills described space exercise areas. Some outpatient clinics are 
in this chapter, medical and allied health profes- specialized and accept only certain patients—for 
sionals who work at inpatient facilities must often example, people with cardiovascular disease, hand 
be knowledgeable about ambulation and patient injuries, or spinal conditions. 
transfer techniques, bedsore prevention, and other People may be hindered from traveling regularly 
needs unique to the long-term care of sedentary for treatment at an outpatient facility by social, eco- 
or immobile patients. nomic, or other factors. As a result, many outpatient 

clinics send therapists to patients’ homes to provide 

Outpatient Clinic Settings both rehabilitative and habilitative home care. The 
quality and quantity of home health care can be 

Outpatient clinic settings are characterized by improved through the use of technology in the form 
short-term patient visits (patients do not stay over- of apps and web portals (Lee & Billings, 2016). 
night). These types of facilities, which comprise the 
most diverse settings for medical and allied health 
professionals, include physician’s offices, physical Sport Team Settings 
therapy clinics, sports medicine clinics, and cardiac Athletic training clinics constitute a specific type 
rehabilitation facilities. Outpatient facilities may of outpatient facility; they are typically located in 
have a wide range of specialized equipment to high schools, colleges, and professional team set- 
meet the needs of their clientele—the more diverse tings. The first athletic “training rooms,” as it were, 
the range of people being treated, the broader the consisted simply of a table and a whirlpool tank 
range of equipment. Most outpatient clinics consist located in the corner of the locker room. Today, 
of examination areas, specialized treatment and although the size and complexity may vary, ath- 
rehabilitation areas, hydrotherapy pools, and open- letic training facilities at some high schools and at 

Therapeutic exercise professionals provide care for people recovering from illness or injury. 
© Human Kinetics 



Chapter 12 |C areers in Medicine and Allied Health 317 

major colleges and universities are state-of-the-art The professional roles discussed here often 
health care clinics. overlap. Indeed, many people pursue multiple 

Facilities typically include treatment and reha- credentials, such as athletic training and physical 
bilitation areas, examination rooms, hydrotherapy therapy (table 12.1). The need for multiskilled 
areas, and space dedicated to injury prevention and multi-credentialed individuals will increase as 
methods such as taping, wrapping, and bracing. competition in the health care industry increases 
Most professional sports medicine facilities, and and the health care job market tightens. 
many of those in colleges and universities, also All medical and allied health professions require 
have X-ray rooms and space where minor medical a postbaccalaureate education to enter the profes- 
procedures can be performed. Many sport team sion. Physical therapists in the United States, for 
settings also offer weight rooms, cardiovascular instance, must graduate from a clinical doctorate 
fitness centers, nutrition centers, swimming pools, in physical therapy (DPT) degree program. In 
and exercise science laboratories. These types of contrast, the entry-level education requirement 
facilities expand the scope and breadth of the for physical therapy assistants and occupational 
therapeutic exercise programs that can be offered therapy assistants is currently an associate’s degree. 
to habilitate and rehabilitate athletes. An undergraduate education in kinesiology 

should provide you with comprehensive knowl- 

Private Practice edge of human movement, the effects of exercise, 
and normal anatomical and physiological functions. 

Many people are intrigued by the thought of being An undergraduate kinesiology degree provides an 
their own boss. Private practice is an entrepre- ideal basis for advanced studies in many gradu- 
neurial venture in which a professional establishes ate-level therapeutic exercise programs. You should 
his or her own place of work. In order to launch a always check the current educational requirements 
practice, the professional needs a source of funding for any profession that you intend to pursue and 
(e.g., business loan, personal wealth, investors) use elective courses to fulfill any specific program 
because physical therapy and occupational ther- requirements. 
apy are capital-intensive professions that require The educational requirements of these profes- 
expensive equipment and a lease on a physical sions vary depending on their focus, but most 
facility. Other expenses that must be considered have a strong science base and an active clinical 
include utilities and support staff. education component. You will also benefit from 

Most professionals do not begin their careers course work in theoretical kinesiology (covered in 
in their own practice; instead, they usually make part II of this text), and you can round out your 
the transition into private practice after working professional knowledge by taking other specialized 
at an established clinical practice. This approach courses and clinical practicums. Your background 
allows beginning professionals to learn about the in kinesiology will provide you with a well-rounded 
nuances of the business world and build a patient education, including many of the skills that will be 
base and a professional reputation. expected of tomorrow’s health care professionals. 

Medical and allied health professions are 

Roles for Medical characterized by differing levels of regulation 
and required preparation. Therefore, health care 

and Allied Health Professionals professionals must pay close attention to state 
licensure requirements, especially when changing 

Because kinesiology students develop a back- 
locations. To explore these professions in more 

ground in the anatomical and physical principles of 
detail, see the resources listed at the end of this 

human movement, they are well prepared to enter 
chapter, which include key journals and profes- 

medical and allied health care professions that use 
sional organizations. 

therapeutic exercise in habilitation or rehabilitation 
treatment regimens. These professions include 
athletic training, cardiac rehabilitation, dentistry, Primary Medical Professions 
occupational therapy, medicine, physician assistant- Primary medical care is provided by licensed cli- 
ships, physical therapy, and recreation therapy. This nicians with professional doctorate degrees. Phy- 
section describes these professions, the settings in sicians receive medical doctor (MD) or doctor of 
which they take place, and the educational require- osteopathy (DO) degrees, while dentists typically 
ments and credentials needed to practice them. receive doctor of dental surgery (DDS) degrees. 



Introduction to Kinesiology 

Table 12.1 Skill Matrix 
Clinical Therapeutic Orthotists 

Athletic exercise Occupational Physical recreation and 

trainer physiologist therapist therapist specialist prosthetists 

Fitness assessment X 

Analysis of function X X xX X X xX 

Neuromuscular condi- X X X X 

tioning 

Diagnostic skill X X X 

Rehabilitation 

Developing interven- X X X X Xx 

tion programs 

Restoring range of xX X X 
motion 

Restoring strength X X X X 

Improving cardiovas- X X X X 
cular function 

Restoring activities of xX X X X X xX 
daily living 

Restoring work or X X X X xX X 
sport function 

Technical design and 
fabrication 

Completion of these degrees must be followed up forms of medicine have blurred with the development 
by passing national board exams before these cli- of patient-centered care. Physicians work collabora- 
nicians can practice. Outstanding kinesiology grad- tively with, and may supervise or direct, most of the 
uates who have taken additional courses that meet allied health professionals described in this chapter. 
admissions requirements for these professional 
programs have become successful medical pro- 
fessionals. Kinesiology graduates also have been KEY PON Se eee 
successful in admission, completion, and licensure Often physicians must oversee a patient’s plan of 
as physician assistants (PA) and chiropractors (DC). care. Supervision implies a physical presence and 

Physician observation of a person’s activity. Direction is a broader 
management term that relies on verbal or written 

The American Medical Association recognizes Medical 
instructions. 

Doctors and Doctors of Osteopathy as physicians. 
Both types of physicians can diagnose diseases and 
injuries, prescribe medicines, and perform surgeries. The pathways to practice are also very similar for 
Although this is now more generalization than fact, these practitioners. Both require academic medical 
the primary difference between MDs and DOs is training, typically 4 years, followed by a residency 
philosophical—MDs diagnose and treat conditions program in a specialty area that can take up to 7 
and symptoms, whereas DOs use a more holistic years. All U.S. medical schools are highly compet- 
approach by recognizing the interrelatedness of the itive and place a strong emphasis on grade point 
body’s systems. DOs also incorporate osteopathic averages and specific course work. Good scores 
manual medicine (OMM) into their plan of care. Over on the Medical College Admission Test (MCAT) is 
time, the original distinctions between these two also a common requirement. 



Chapter 12| Careers in Medicine and Allied Health 319 

Identifying Whom You Would Like to Work With 
People exploring a career in allied health often first identify the population with whom they wish 
to work. Take a moment to think about your favorite populations. Put a check mark by any of the 
following groups that seem appealing to you. 

__ Infants _____ Nonathletes 
—___ Children _____ Healthy people 

_____ Adults __ Recovering patients 

_____ Senior citizens ____ People requiring long-term care 

____ People with injuries -s Othes 

_____ People with limited function 

Athletes or other physically active people 

MDs must sit for the United States Medical should sit for the Dental Admission Test, which is 
Licensing Examination (USMILE) before they can a prerequisite for admission into dental school. 
practice. DOs sit for the Comprehensive Medical Before they can practice, dentists must pass the 
Licensing Examination (COMLEX), although they written National Board Dental Examination. A clin- 
have the option to sit for the USMILE. Each has the ical (practice-based) examination is also required. 
option to receive board certification in a range of State licensure is also required to practice. Although 
medical specialties, but many DOs tend to engage most dentists practice general dentistry, some may 
in primary medicine, while MDs tend to specialize. choose to receive a specialty certification in areas 
Both MDs and DOs must have state licensure to such as pediatric dentistry, oral and maxillofacial 
practice. surgery, or endodontics (root canals). 

The need for physicians will continue to grow, The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics predicts 
especially in medically underserved communities. faster-than-average job growth for dentists through 
Earnings depend on the physician’s salary and 2028. In 2019, the median annual salary for a den- 
practice type. tist was $159,200 (U.S. BLS, 2020). 

Dentist Physician Assistant 

Physicians who specialize in the treatment of dis- The Physician Assistant (PA) profession was 
eases and injuries to the mouth earn a doctor of founded in the mid-1960s to address a shortage 
dental medicine (sometimes referred to as doctor of physicians in the United States. The first PAs 
of medical dentistry) (DMD) or doctor of dental were predominantly military medical corpsmen— 
surgery (DDS) degree. These two degrees repre- medics—who were retrained to enter mainstream 
sent a historical nuance rather than a difference in medicine in the United States (Carter, 2001). 
practice. Although dentistry often conjures images Initially, the official title of PAs was Physician’s 
of having a cavity filled, dentists are responsible for Assistants, with an emphasis on the apostrophe 
a wide range of medical and surgical procedures s, because they literally assisted the physician. As 
involving diseases or injuries to the mouth, gums, their education and role evolved, their title changed 

tongue, and salivary glands. X-rays or other imag- to the current nomenclature. The removal of the 

ing techniques are used to identify pathologies apostrophe s was more than a grammatical change, 

involving the teeth, jaw, and the roof of the mouth. it signaled the ability to practice relatively free of 

The educational plan for dentists is similar to physician supervision. Through this transition, the 

that of physicians. Dentists complete a 4-year dental PA was reclassified from an allied health profession 

degree program that includes both classroom and to a medical profession. 

clinical education. Undergraduate courses in anat- PA professional practice resembles that of phy- 

omy, physiology, mathematics, and psychology are sicians and is largely diagnostic in nature. The 

common prerequisites. Prospective dental students PA relies on history taking, physical examination, 



Ml 320 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Select Medical and Allied Health Professions Specializations* 

This chapter covers the main professions in medicine and allied health, but within each of these 

careers a wide and varying number of specializations exist, and you should investigate the ones 

that interest you. Not all of these specializations occur in every profession, but these are some 

examples: 

Emergency medicine 

General surgery 

Geriatrics 

Internal medicine 

Neurology 

Occupational medicine 

Orthopedics 

Pain management 

Pediatrics 

WUNSANA IA  NAP hysical medicine and rehabilitation 

>» Sports medicine 
*The actual specialty specification often varies by profession. 

imaging (X-rays, CT scans, etc.), and laboratory To maintain certification and licensure, a PA 

work to arrive at a diagnosis. From this diagnosis must accumulate 100 hours of continuing medical 
the appropriate interventions can be identified. education every 2 years. Every 10 years, the PA must 

PAs still work with physicians, nurses, and other sit for the Physician Assistant National Recertifying 
medical personnel in hospital settings, although Examination (PANRE). 
more than half of PAs work in physician offices or A bachelor’s degree is required for admission 
clinics such as urgent care facilities. Hospital-based into a PA master’s degree program. Each institu- 
PAs may perform specialized work in the emer- tion has specific prerequisites for admission, but 
gency department or the operating room, or in the requirements for PA programs are similar to 
caring for patients who have been admitted. Other those of medical school. There is emphasis on the 
PAs may be employed in nursing and rehabilitation sciences such as chemistry, physiology, anatomy, 
facilities. biology, and microbiology. Most programs prefer 

PAs are educated at the master’s degree level, or require prior health care experience such as 
typically for 2 to 3 academic years. In addition emergency medical technician, paramedic, military 
to rigorous classroom education, PA education medical corpsman, or emergency room techni- 
involves approximately 1 year of clinical education cian. Programs also tend to have stringent grade 
consisting of specialized rotations that focus on point average requirements. If you are interested 
practice areas such as emergency medicine, gen- in pursuing a career as a PA, begin identifying 
eral surgery, internal medicine, family medicine, potential programs that interest you, and tailor 
pediatric medicine, women’s health, and behavioral your education and experiences to the required 
and mental health. prerequisites. 

Professional entry requires passing the Physician The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics projects a 
Assistant National Certifying Examination (PANCE). much faster-than-average increase in job growth 
Graduation from an accredited physician assistant through 2028 (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 
program is required to sit for the PANCE. The can- 2020). The increasing job market for PAs is being 
didate is permitted six attempts within 6 years to driven by a shortage of physicians and health care 
pass this examination. After passing the examina- providers in general. The median pay for PAs as of 
tion, the PA-C credential is awarded. The individual 2020 is $112,260. 
must then receive a state license to practice. 



Chapter 12 |C areers in Medicine and Allied Health 321 

Chiropractor and anatomy being the most common. Blended 
Chiropractic care is based on the premise that programs will incorporate prerequisite courses 
improperly functioning spinal joints and other into the undergraduate portion of the program. 
spinal structures negatively affect other body If you are interested in pursuing chiropractic as a 
systems, resulting in poor mechanics, pain, and career, begin identifying potential programs that 

decreased health. The base of care involves spinal interest you and tailor your education to meet the 
adjustments to decrease pain and improve function, required prerequisites. 

especially in the back and neck. Chiropractors will see slightly faster than aver- 

The chiropractic diagnostic process follows that age job growth through 2028. The median pay for 

described on page 307. However, chiropractors pay a chiropractic physician is $70,340 (U.S. Bureau of 

particular attention to the patient’s posture and Labor Statistics, 2020). The growth of chiropractic 

spinal position. Radiographs (X-rays) are routinely jobs is fueled by an overall physician and health 

ordered to obtain precise information on spinal care shortage and is further strengthened by an 

alignment. Appropriate adjustments are then made emphasis on complementary medicine that does 

to alleviate the patient’s symptoms. Most chiro- not rely on medications to control pain. 

practors will follow up spinal adjustments with 
interventions such as heat, cold, electrical stim- Allied Health Professions 
ulation, ultrasound, massage, and flexibility and 

The allied health professionals described in this 
strengthening exercises to improve posture. Many 

chapter may work under the direction of, or in 
employ a physical therapist or an athletic trainer 

cooperation with, medical professionals. This 
to implement the therapeutic exercise portion of interprofessional cooperation forms a health care 
the patient’s plan of care. Braces, orthotics, or shoe 

team that is focused on restoring the patient to the 
inserts may be prescribed to improve posture and highest level of function. 
function. Beware of chiropractic clinicians who 
try to stretch their scope of practice beyond the Athletic Trainer 
immediate musculoskeletal alignment and health 

High school, college, and professional athletes 
of the spine. 

become injured at staggering rates; for example, 
Most chiropractors are engaged in private prac- 

as many as one-third of the 1 million high school 
tice or are part of a chiropractic clinic; others may 

football players in the United States syffer an 
work in hospital settings. A portion of the chiro- 

injury each year (King et al., 2015). Combining the 
practor’s time may be devoted to a specialty area. 

excitement of athletics with the demands of health 
Chiropractic education involves a 3- to 4-year 

care, athletic training is the only profession that 
professional doctoral degree. In addition to class- 

falls entirely within the realm of sports medicine. 
room and laboratory education, students engage 

The title athletic trainer can be misleading. These 
in clinical rotations. Graduates receive the doctor 

professionals are not coaches, personal trainers, or 
of chiropractic (DC) degree. general performance-improving personnel. Rather, 

To practice, chiropractors must first pass the athletic training is a health care profession that 
four-part exam administered by the National Board addresses prevention, risk management, clinical 
of Chiropractic Examiners. Each part of the exam- diagnosis, immediate care, treatment, and rehabili- 
ination is administered separately at a stage of the tation of injuries and other conditions experienced 
educational program. Part I addresses anatomy by athletes and other physically active people. An 
and sciences, Part II covers clinical topics, Part III athletic trainer (AT) works under the direction of a 
focuses on diagnostic techniques and interventions, licensed medical (MD) or osteopathic (DO) physi- 
and Part IV is the culminating section and focuses cian. Besides attending to the direct health care of 
on the individual’s ability to practice. State licensure athletes and others engaged in physical activity, an 
is required to practice. These requirements and the athletic trainer coordinates referrals to appropriate 
continuing education needed to maintain licensure medical and health care specialists. 
vary by state. Traditionally, athletic trainers have been 

A bachelor’s degree is required for admission employed by high schools, colleges and universi- 
into a doctor of chiropractic degree program, but ties, and professional sport teams. Now, however, 
some institutions may blend the undergraduate new roles are emerging for athletic trainers in 
with the doctoral program to allow the degree to hospitals, sports medicine clinics, military clinics, 
be completed in 6 years. The prerequisite courses industrial rehabilitation clinics, and other allied 
vary by program, with physics, chemistry, biology, 



ME 322 Introduction to Kinesiology 

medical environments. Thus, an athletic trainer’s ing Education (CAATE). Academic course work is 

roles and responsibilities vary depending on the supplemented by clinical education that permits 

work setting. students to affiliate with athletic training clinics at 

States are gradually beginning to mandate ath- high schools, colleges, and professional sport teams 

letic training coverage of high-risk sports at the and gives them the opportunity to learn in private 

high school level. In addition, a trend toward hiring clinics and hospitals. Many athletic trainers also 
full-time athletic trainers is increasing, although go on to pursue postprofessional education in the 
many secondary schools that use the services of field through additional graduate programs or by 
athletic trainers do so by contracting for them pursuing training in additional clinical treatments. 
through local sports medicine clinics and hospitals. One way to meet the prerequisite course require- 

Colleges and professional teams hire their own ments for an entry-level master’s degree program is 
full-time athletic trainers. Athletic training is now to obtain an undergraduate degree in kinesiology 
practiced in this traditional athletic setting and in or a related field; such a degree also gives you 
other clinical settings. exposure to the required foundational knowledge. 

» Athletic setting. Athletic trainers are uniquely National certification testing of athletic trainers 

positioned to implement procedures for prevent- is conducted by the Board of Certification (BOC). 

ing or decreasing the occurrence of sport injuries. BOC certification is required to work as an ath- 

They have the opportunity to work with the ath- letic trainer at a major college or university, with a 

lete before an injury, examine the injury to form a professional sport team, or with the U.S. Olympic 

clinical diagnosis, and then work with the patient Committee. It is also required by 49 U.S. states as a 

during the rehabilitation process. prerequisite for practicing athletic training (Board 
of Certification, 2016). 

» Clinical setting. Community recreation 
In Canada, athletic trainers (referred to as 

leagues, road races, and personal workout regi- 
athletic therapists) must complete an academic 

mens have exposed millions of Americans to the 
program accredited by the Canadian Athletic Ther- 

risk of athletic injuries. Add the fact that many high 
apists Association (CATA), as well as 1,200 hours 

school athletes do not receive the direct services of 
of clinical experience under the supervision of a 

a full-time athletic trainer, and you can understand 
Certified Athletic Therapist, or CAT(C). CATA and 

the increase in the number of sports medicine and 
BOC have a reciprocity agreement for certification 

physical therapy clinics. The emergence of athletic 
between the United States and Canada. 

trainers in these settings has spurred growth in 
The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) projects 

other rehabilitation settings, including corpo- 
that jobs for athletic trainers will grow at a much 

rate and industrial clinics, hospitals, and private 
faster rate than for other professions through 2028 

practice. Athletic trainers’ roles in these emerging 
(U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020). Part of the 

settings may differ from those of athletic trainers 
reason for this is that school districts are replacing 

in more traditional settings. These roles may also 
part-time athletic training positions with full-time 

vary between states. 
positions and adding more athletic trainers to 

As of 2022, athletic trainers seeking national 
existing sports medicine departments in order to 

certification are required to graduate from an 
follow a collegiate model of athletic health care. 

entry-level master’s degree program accredited by 
Employment opportunities for athletic trainers 

the Commission on Accreditation of Athletic Train- 
may also increase at hospitals, physical therapy 

Athletic Training: Prerequisite Courses and Foundational Knowledge 

Prerequisite Courses Foundational Knowledge 

Anatomy Physics Biomechanics and Pathophysiology 
Biology Physiology pathomechanics Public health 
Chemistry Psychology Epidemiology Research design 

Exercise physiology Statistics 

Human anatomy 



Chapter 12| Careers in Medicine and Allied Health 

clinics, and sports medicine clinics, where athletic Clinical exercise physiologists and exercise spe- 
trainers work as members of rehabilitation teams. cialists are employed in hospitals, specialty clinics, 
Additional job growth is predicted in military and and health and fitness centers. Most ACSM RCEPs 
industrial settings (where athletic trainers care for work in rehabilitation centers where patients are 
line employees) and in physician practices and hos- recovering from injury, disease, or surgery. Others 
pitals (where they extend the functions of a phy- work in stand-alone cardiac rehabilitation centers 
sician). The average salary in 2018 for an athletic where specialized exercise equipment and rooms 
trainer who held a master’s degree was $56,347 are available in an outpatient facility. Some hold 
(National Athletic Trainers’ Association, 2018). exercise classes at YMCAs, schools, or other exter- 

nal facilities. Generally, clinical exercise physiolo- 
Clinical Exercise Physiologist gists work closely with nurses, nurse practitioners, 
Exercise supervised by a Certified Exercise Phys- physicians, and physician assistants. Exercise spe- 
iologist (ACSM EP-C) is an effective treatment for cialists play an important role in rehabilitation pro- 
people with chronic cardiovascular, pulmonary, and grams and may also work in prevention programs. 
metabolic diseases. Certified Exercise Physiologists Typical course work required of people pursuing 
administer and interpret fitness assessments and a career in clinical exercise physiology includes 
from those data develop appropriate exercise pro- anatomy, physiology, nutrition, biomechanics, 
grams. ACSM EP-Cs administer cardiopulmonary exercise testing and prescription, and cardiac test- 
exercise tests in hospital laboratories, administer ing and prescription. Students should also pursue 
fitness testing, and implement and deliver cardio- clinical rotations and field work to supplement 
vascular conditioning programs both for individu- their learning experiences. 
als who are apparently disease free and for those The American College of Sports Medicine offers 
with medically controlled diseases such as diabetes. certification for exercise physiologists, clinical exer- 

The next level of exercise physiologist is the cise physiologists, and registered clinical exercise 
Certified Clinical Exercise Physiologist (ACSM CEP). physiologists. Certification as an exercise physiolo- 
Exercise testing such as graded exercise tests and gist requires a bachelor’s degree in exercise science, 
exercise prescription and fitness counseling for those exercise physiology, or kinesiology, and candidates 
individuals with cardiovascular, respiratory, or met- must currently be adult CPR/AED certified. Clini- 
abolic disorders all fall in the ACSM CEP’s domain. cal exercise physiologist certification requires the 

The Registered Clinical Exercise Physiologist same education as the exercise physiologist cer- 
(ACSM RCEP) is the highest level of certification tificate, but it also includes 400 hours (accredited 

for exercise physiologists. A hospital may choose to program) or 500 hours (nonaccredited program) 
offer a cardiac rehabilitation exercise program for of practical (clinical) experience and certification 

people recovering from heart surgery. The registered in basic life support or CPR for the professional 
clinical exercise physiologist and the physician, rescuer. To become a Registered Clinical Exercise 
working as a team, collect the client’s medical history Physiologist, a master’s or doctoral degree in phys- 

and evaluate her cardiopulmonary function. Using iology is required along with 600 hours of clinical 

these data, the two clinicians develop a structured experience and certification in basic life support 

exercise program, whereupon the client works with or CPR for the professional rescuer. Please refer to 

an exercise specialist to progress through the pro- the ACSM’s website for the current requirements. 

gram. The patient’s progress is evaluated at regular The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics projects an 

intervals by the program director, physician, and increase in the number of exercise physiology jobs 

exercise specialist. This type of exercise physiologist through 2028. In 2019, the median annual salary 

is also responsible for administering the rehabilita- was $49,170 (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020). 

tion center and educating the cardiac rehabilitation One’s employment opportunities are increased 

staff and is often engaged in research. when status as a registered clinical exercise phys- 
iologist is combined with another degree or cre- 
dential—for example, in nursing. 

JS 00h eee 
Occupational Therapist 

Credentials similar to the American College of Sports 
An occupational therapist (OT) helps people with 

Medicine’s ES and RCEP certifications are available to 
physical, emotional, or mental disability to restore 

people who want to work in the fitness setting, such 
or develop as much independence as possible in 

as health and fitness instructors. 
_ OS ee daily living and work throughout their lives (the 



a 324 Introduction to Kinesiology 

term occupational has roots in the word activity). Occupational therapists may specialize in 
Some of the physical care rendered by occupational task-specific, work-related rehabilitation in order to 
therapists closely mirrors some of the rehabilitative help clients reacquire the motor and cognitive skills 
exercises used by physical therapists. Indeed, in they need to return to work. This type of activity 
many rehabilitation centers, a physical therapist may range from teaching basic skills such as coor- 
and an occupational therapist work together on a dinated movement to specific skills such as ham- 
single patient’s case. mering, typing, or driving a car. To assist people 

As with many health professions, the roots of with disability, an occupational therapist may be 
occupational therapy can be traced to postwar reha- called on to evaluate the layout of schools, homes, 
bilitation of veterans; specifically, pioneers in the and workplaces in order to suggest methods of 
profession taught craft skills to soldiers with dis- eliminating functional barriers. An occupational 
ability (Ambrosi & Barker-Schwartz, 1995). Today, therapist often employs a Certified Occupational 
occupational therapists specialize in functional Therapy Assistant (COTA) as a clinical assistant in 
bracing and the modification of everyday items carrying out rehabilitation plans. 
for the special needs of their patients. Functional Occupational therapists and occupational ther- 
bracing is the use of a supportive or assistive device apy assistants (OTAs) work in hospitals, rehabil- 
that allows a joint to function despite anatomical itation centers, nursing homes, and orthopedic 
or biomechanical limitations. Examples include clinics and provide outpatient service in secondary 
knee braces and splints of various kinds, such as schools and colleges. In 2015, an estimated 133,000 
wrist and hand splints that allow people to eat occupational therapists were in the U.S. workforce 
with a fork. Occupational specialists also work (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020). They instruct 
with people to improve their concentration, motor people with disabilities (e.g., muscular dystrophy, 
skills, and problem-solving ability. cerebral palsy, spinal cord injury) in the use of 

Many clinical professionals receive additional training in a specialization like pediatrics. 
FatCamera/E+/Getty Images 



Chapter 12| Careers in Medicine and Allied Health 

adaptive equipment such as wheelchairs, walkers, therapy programs are eligible to sit for the U.S. 
and aids for eating and dressing. They may also examination; students in the province of Quebec 
design special equipment for home or work use must also complete three Test of English as a For- 
and cooperate with employers or supervisors to eign Language (TOEFL) examinations. Graduates 
modify the work environment for a patient. of accredited programs in the United States are 

Schools often hire occupational therapists to eligible to practice in Canada. 
work with a particular age group or a group with According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 
a particular disability. Occupational therapists the employment picture for occupational therapists 
may evaluate a child’s abilities, modify equipment, looks promising through 2028, with an expected 
and help the child participate fully in school pro- 18 percent increase in employment opportunities 
grams and activities. Other occupational therapists (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020). Demand 
work in mental health settings or drug or alcohol for occupational therapist services will increase as 
rehabilitation settings. These individuals work in a growing segment of the population moves into 
large rehabilitation centers in cooperation with middle age, an age at which the incidence of heart 
physical therapists, or they provide home health attack and stroke tends to increase. In addition, 
care services. the steady growth in the population over age 75 

Occupational therapists generally attain their will ensure that demand for therapeutic services 
education at the master’s degree level, and doctor- remains high. Thus, hospitals will continue to 
al-level programs are also an option. Certification employ a large number of occupational therapists, 
or licensure as an occupational therapy assistant including in their outpatient rehabilitation clinics. 
requires the successful completion of a 2-year The market for school occupational therapists 
program. also looks promising as the population of school- 

Both occupational therapists and occupational children increases and children with disability con- 
therapy assistants must be licensed in the states tinue to receive specialized attention. The median 
where they practice. The basic requirement for annual income of occupational therapists in 2019 
licensure is to complete an accredited program was $84,950 (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020). 
and pass the National Board for Certification in 
Occupational Therapy examination. Those who Physical Therapist 
pass the examination earn the title of Occupational The physical therapist (PT) is educated to provide 
Therapist Registered (OTR) or Certified Occupa- rehabilitative care to a diverse patient population 
tional Therapist Assistant (COTA). with a wide range of injuries, illnesses, and dis- 

Professional reciprocity exists between the eases. Patients include accident victims; people 
United States and Canada for occupational therapy. with low-back pain, arthritis, or head injury; and 
Graduates from Canadian-accredited occupational those with a congenital or acquired disease state 

Hot Career Opportunity 
Health Care Data Analytics and Visualization 

Through the course of their normal operations, medical and allied health professionals collect a 
large amount of information. When stored separately, this information is useful only to the patient 
and the provider. When this information is pooled, it creates valuable data. 

Data analytics is the science and process of extracting meaningful and useful knowledge from 

the database. When extracted in a purposeful manner, these data can identify health care trends, 

determine the accuracy of diagnostic techniques, ascertain the efficacy of various interventions and 

their outcomes, and provide predictive insights. Trends may be used for budget management and 

personnel needs. When data analytics is combined with data visualization (presentation of data in 

a graphical format) or infographics, findings can be easily communicated to the target audience. 

To provide context to the findings, many health care data scientists have professional training 

in a medical or allied health field. Additional education in statistics, computer programming, and 

data mining techniques is needed to become a competent data analyst. Doctoral or specialized 

certificates are two routes to become a data scientist. An artistic or creative mindset is useful in 

developing data visualizations. 



Mg 326 Introduction to Kinesiology 

such as cancer. A physical therapist may treat a program. The program typically includes clinical 

range of patients from infants to seniors with con- affiliations that expose the student to several work 

ditions such as joint injury, burns, cardiovascular settings and patient types. Entry-level physical ther- 

disease, and neurological deficits. In addition, phys- apy education takes place at the master’s degree 

ical therapists are often in daily contact with other level, but virtually all entry-level programs are 

health professionals, such as nurses and physicians. clinical doctorates. Physical therapy programs are 
accredited by the Commission on Accreditation in 
Physical Therapy Education (CAPTE). 

BeN ee e 
Physical therapists administer the patient's program 

woKEY POUND tees ee a a ees 
and perform the required functional evaluations. 
Physical therapy assistants function under a physi- Physical therapists are educated as generalists but 

cal therapist's supervision and assume much of the tend to develop specialties while in the workforce. 

hands-on patient care. 

The national professional organization for phys- 

Physical therapists work approximately 40 hours ical therapists is the American Physical Therapy 

per week, including some evenings and weekends. Association (APTA). PTs are licensed to practice on 

Physical therapists combine diagnostic tests with a state-by-state basis, and the APTA offers volun- 

passive interventions, active interventions, and tary certification for each specialty area. Licensed 

manual techniques such as joint mobilization to professionals may also seek advanced education in 

rehabilitate or habilitate their clients. The therapy physical therapy via residency or PhD programs. 

used depends on the condition being treated. Physical therapists who specialize in sports med- 

Therapy for orthopedic injuries relies heavily on icine have a strong orthopedic interest and may 

resistance training and proprioception activities choose to pursue specialty certification in orthope- 

(i.e., activities that improve knowledge of the posi- dic or sport physical therapy. These individuals may 

tion, weight, and resistance of objects in relation also have education in athletic training, strength 

to the body). In contrast, therapy designed to treat and conditioning, or exercise physiology. 

people with disease states and neurological con- Becoming a physical therapy assistant involves 

ditions tends to emphasize cardiovascular aspects completing a 2-year associate’s degree accredited 

and neuromuscular control. by CAPTE, the same organization that accredits 

Entry-level education prepares students to enter physical therapy programs. In many states, though 

the workforce as generalists, but once a person not all, physical therapy assistants must be licensed 

begins to practice professionally, the tendency is in order to practice. Regardless of whether they are 

to begin to specialize. The employment settings licensed, physical therapy assistants work under 

for physical therapists and physical therapy assis- the supervision of a physical therapist to carry out 

tants are as diverse as their patient base. Because the prescribed protocol. Patients who are under 

they tend to specialize in their practice, physical the care of a physical therapy assistant must be 

therapists may work in specialized private clinics reevaluated regularly by the physical therapist. 

or serve specialized (e.g., pediatric, neurological) Licensure of physical therapists and physical 

roles in hospitals, although some professionals still therapy assistants is contingent on completing the 

fill the generalist role. appropriate program (.e., physical therapist or phys- 

About two-thirds of physical therapists work ical therapy assistant) and passing an examination 

in a hospital, skilled nursing facility, health and recognized by the state. Historically, the physical 
wellness center, or clinic. Physical therapists may therapist’s patients were required to have a referral 
also be in private practice or provide home care from a physician, as well as physician oversight. Most 
services. In addition, they may be employed by states now permit direct physical therapy access, 
school systems, colleges, or universities to pro- thus eliminating the need for a referral. However, 

vide on-site services to students. Some physical either a referral or physician consultation is often 
therapists hold more than one job—one in private required for insurance reimbursement. 
practice and one in a health care facility. Regulations for physical therapists educated 

The wide range of potential patients and the outside of the United States vary from state to 
broad scope of conditions that physical therapists state. In general, these individuals must complete 
treat require a vigorous and demanding academic a course of study that is substantially equivalent to 



Chapter 12| Careers in Medicine and Allied Health 

that of U.S. physical therapy education and must gram for people with severe and persistent mental 
be proficient in the English language. For more illnesses may have a strong emphasis on working 
information, contact the Foreign Credentialing toward social skill development and leisure educa- 
Commission on Physical Therapy. tion. In contrast, a person working with older adults 

With advances in medical treatments, a higher who have dementia may use leisure activities to help 
percentage of accident victims are likely to survive, slow the decline in cognitive function. 
which increases the demand for rehabilitative care. Those considering a career in recreation therapy 
In addition, employers, eager to reduce work-re- have an opportunity to work with a wide variety of 
lated injuries, are likely to employ more physical people in many different settings. Personal foun- 
therapists to serve as worksite evaluators and as dations for entering this career include a strong 
safety instructors to limit the number of injuries belief in the role played by recreation in creating a 
that occur (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020). healthy lifestyle and an acceptance of people who 
Pending federal legislation imposes limits on reim- have different ability levels. Recreation therapists 
bursement to therapists and may affect job growth learn diverse techniques for helping people to meet 
in the short term, but the long-term employment their personal goals. 
picture remains quite healthy. Historically, recreation therapists have worked 

The need for physical therapists is expected to in inpatient and outpatient settings in psychiatry 
grow by 22 percent, thus creating 54,200 new jobs, and physical rehabilitation. As with other health 
through 2028 (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020). care professionals, recreation therapists are work- 
In 2019, the median salary for physical therapists ing increasingly with older adults across their 
was $89,440 (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020). continuum of care in facilities such as subacute 
On average, physical therapy assistants earned care settings, adult day care centers, and assisted 
$48,990. The need for physical therapist assistants living residences. 
is expected to increase by 26 percent through 2024 Many recreation therapists work in community 
(U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020). settings, most often in community recreation but 

also in programs for people with continuing dis- 
Therapeutic Recreation Specialist abilities, such as cerebral palsy, intellectual disabil- 
The physiological and psychological benefits ity, or developmental disability. In these settings, 
of exercise and leisure activities are described recreation therapists often help people continue 
throughout this text. Therapeutic recreation special- their treatment programs after discharge from an 
ists, or recreation therapists, use these activities—as inpatient program; they also introduce people 
well as dance, drama, arts and crafts, animals, and with disability to new or modified leisure options. 
community reintegration outings—to help people Recreation therapists in community settings work 

with physical, cognitive, emotional, or behavioral both in segregated programs created specifically 
disabilities restore function, reduce or eliminate to meet the needs of people with disability and as 
the effects of disability, and develop independence. inclusion specialists, wherein they help include 

Recreation therapists work cooperatively with people both with and without disability in typical 
others on the treatment team to integrate functional recreation programming. 

activities into an overall rehabilitation program. Recreation therapists are also employed in 

Depending on the setting, the treatment team may substance abuse rehabilitation centers, residential 

consist of physical therapists, occupational thera- facilities for people with intellectual disability or 

pists, speech therapists, physicians, dietitians, and developmental disability, camps for children or 

mental health counselors. As part of this team, the adults with disability, and public schools. They 

recreation therapist focuses on leisure activities to usually incorporate community settings into their 

restore function. For example, recreation therapists patients’ treatment plans. In inpatient settings, 

can use leisure activities such as fishing, painting, recreation therapists are often the members of 

or singing to restore limb dominance, to decrease the treatment team who determine readiness for 

anxiety, to introduce positive leisure values and discharge by observing the patient’s functioning in 

alternatives, or simply to promote the person’s a community setting during an outing toward the 

overall sense of well-being. end of a hospital stay. Approximately one-third of 

In many programs, the goals for the patient are recreational therapy jobs are based in hospitals, and 

to achieve independent function and promote social another third are based in nursing care facilities; 

integration (Wardlaw et al., 2000). For example, a relatively few recreational therapists are self-em- 

recreation therapist working in an outpatient pro- ployed (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020). 



Ml 328 Introduction to Kinesiology 

As with all allied health professionals, recreation ficial limbs to enable patients to improve function. 

therapists assess patients to determine their needs Generally speaking, orthotists fabricate braces and 

and desires, create treatment plans in conjunction splints, whereas prosthetists create and fit artificial 

with patients, and implement and evaluate the limbs. An emerging area, pedorthics, specializes in 

plans. These professionals must be familiar with foot care. The devices OPs create are collectively 

the limitations associated with various medical con- referred to as appliances. OPs tend to specialize or 
ditions and accurately document medical records. focus on a specific body area or limitation. 

They also need good interpersonal skills. Often working in conjunction with a medical or 
Entering the therapeutic recreation profession allied health professional, the OP will assess the 

usually requires a bachelor’s degree in therapeutic patient’s limitations and desired goals. The appli- 
recreation or a degree in recreation with an empha- ance is then designed, typically using computer 
sis in therapeutic recreation. A limited number of software to fit the patient with a functionality to 
institutions offer stand-alone therapeutic recreation meet the patient’s goal. Often, multiple appliances 
programs; most commonly, therapeutic recreation are needed to meet multiple goals. For example, 
is offered as an emphasis area in a general recre- one type of leg prosthetic may be required for 
ation program. The entry level for therapeutic rec- walking and another for running. 
reation professionals usually requires a bachelor’s The appliance is then fit to the patient, and the 
degree in therapeutic recreation, a term (quarter- or OP provides instruction on how to use and care 
semester-long) internship under a certified recre- for the device. The OP also makes adjustments and 
ation specialist, and completion of the national repairs as needed. 
certification examination. A Certified Therapeutic Most OPs are employed by medical equipment 
Recreation Specialist (CTRS) is credentialed by the and supply companies or ambulatory health care 
National Council for Therapeutic Recreation Cer- facilities. OPs also are employed by hospitals, work 
tification (NTRC). The NTRC has also established in physician offices, or are affiliated with the mili- 
alternative training and internship requirements so tary (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020). 
that graduates from other majors, such as kinesiol- OP education occurs at the master’s degree level 
ogy, can sit for the CTRS certification. in an accredited program, with the typical academic 

The job market for recreation therapists is program being 2 years long. The typical OP program 
expected to grow slightly through 2028. However, includes courses on the materials used to develop 
hospitals, which employ one-third of recreation orthotics and prosthetics. Other courses may include 
therapists, are expected to reduce their staffs neurology, orthopedics, and biomechanics. Fol- 
because of cost containment pressure, and some lowing graduation, the OP must complete a 1-year 
of these cuts will undoubtedly affect recreation residency focused on orthotics or prosthetics. 
therapists. Thus, the most promising opportunities After completing the residency, the OP should 
for recreation therapists are likely to be found at become certified by the American Board for Certi- 
nursing facilities, assisted living residences, and fication in Orthotics, Prosthetics & Pedorthics. The 
adult day care centers because of the growing examination consists of multiple parts focusing on 
population of older adults. The median salary is knowledge and skill. State licensure for OP is varied. 
$48,220 (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020). Prerequisite course requirements include phys- 

ics, biology, anatomy, physiology, and psychology. 
Orthotist and Prosthetist The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics anticipates a 
Orthotist and prosthetist (OP) careers are a blend 20 percent growth through 2038. As of 2019, the 
of health care, engineering, and fabrication. These median salary for an OP was $68,410 (U.S. Bureau 
individuals develop, build, and fit braces and arti- of Labor Statistics, 2020) 

Are You Clinically or Technically Oriented? 

Do you prefer to devise solutions on your own, or would you rather follow a structured sequence 
of steps? Clinicians devise and develop therapeutic exercise plans and are therefore called on to 
solve problems and make decisions. Technicians, in contrast, are experts at performing specific 
sets of skills. Technical professions include physical therapy assistants and occupational therapy 
assistants. Clinical professions include athletic training, physical therapy, occupational therapy, 
and higher levels of cardiac rehabilitation. 



Chapter 12| Careers in Medicine and Allied Health 329 Zz 

Potential Allied Health Careers for Kinesiology Majors to Consider 

Some of the professions described in this chapter are highly competitive. You might also want to 
consider these related professions: 

Health information management (C,7, $) Clinical laboratory technologists (B,t, $$) 
Cardiovascular technologist (A,7, $$) Dietetics/nutritionist (B/M,?, $$) 
Diagnostic medical sonography (A,1, $$) Health administration (B/M,1T, $$$$) 
Nuclear medicine technology (A, -, $$$) Medical technology (B/M,7, $$) 
Radiologic and MRI technologist (A, -, $$) Rehabilitation counseling (M,T, $) 
Respiratory therapy (A,7, $$) Pharmacist (D, -, $$$$) 

Your kinesiology studies should give you a strong background for a medical or allied health 
career, only a few of which are described in this chapter. The required education and prerequisites 
for these professions range from an associate's degree to a professional doctorate. Certificate 
and associate’s degree programs often blend well with other degree programs to produce a mul- 
tiskilled, multicredentialed professional. 

Use the following key to identify the trends and requirements for the professions listed. 

Degree: A—associate’s; C—certificate; B—bachelor’s; M—master’s; D—professional doctorate 
Job trend: 7 10% or greater increase; - 0 to 10% increase; J decreased job opportunities 
Salary: $—$30,000 to $50,000; $$—$50,000 to $75,000; $$$—$75,000 to $100,000; 
$$$$—> $100,000 

Trends and Opportunities Perhaps the biggest trend in future health care, 
however, will be the growing application of remote 

in Medicine and Allied Health home health care. This Internet-based approach 

Many people are now living longer than at any allows clinicians to prescribe, monitor, and eval- 

point in human history. Even so, obesity is preva- uate therapeutic exercise programs by means of 

lent in the United States; due largely to inactivity, video and voice connections, web-based forms, and 

it increases the risk of other conditions, primarily electronic monitoring devices. Perhaps the most 

diabetes. Sedentary living also carries other risks, intriguing aspect of this approach lies in its use of 

such as cardiovascular disease. To combat the phys- video gaming systems, such as Xbox, to entertain 

ical toll and financial costs of unhealthy lifestyles, patients and clients during exercise sessions while 
also providing valuable medical feedback. 

medical and allied health professionals are placing 
The 2020-2021 COVID-19 pandemic illustrated 

an increasing emphasis on the habilitative aspects 
the potential for telemedicine in all aspects of 

of therapeutic exercise. 
health care. To counter the risks inherent to in-per- 

Thus, in the years to come, all of the professions 
son consultations, health care providers turned to 

described in this chapter will place more emphasis 
a technology that most students are familiar with, 

on identifying physical barriers to activity (e.g., 
the use of videoconferencing to replace in-person 

issues of strength, range of motion, and cardiovas- 
meetings. Clinicians can remotely assess the patient’s 

cular limitation) and biomechanical factors that may 
current state of health and well-being, monitor the 

increase the risk of injury. In addition, the aging 
progress of interventions, and provide other forms of 

of the population will require professionals to be 
care without the patient being in physical proximity. 

educated about the unique needs of older people. 
Already, courses in geriatric health care are being 

added to undergraduate and postbaccalaureate 
SREEON eee 

curriculums, and this topic is often emphasized 

in postprofessional continuing education courses Telemedicine and remote home health care is a signifi- 

as well. cant trend in the medical and allied health professions. 



EE 330 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Advice for Students Interested and determine the appropriate course of action. 

To solve problems, medical and allied health pro- 
in Medicine and Allied Health fessionals must be able to access, manage, and 

interpret various forms of information and apply 
By now, you understand that those who work in 

them to the current case. This often requires the 
the sphere of medicine and allied health must 

use of computers and an understanding of how to 
have a keen knowledge of human anatomy, human 

access appropriate websites and perform effective 
physiology, and kinesiology and of the effects of 

literature searches. 
exercise on both healthy and unhealthy people. 

Health care professionals must also be able 
These areas, however, represent only a partial list 

to communicate effectively across demographic, 
of the skills and knowledge required to practice 

sociocultural, and professional boundaries. Cer- 
in this sphere. 

tain settings or roles require additional areas of 
Exercise is therapeutic only when it is performed 

knowledge. For instance, professionals who work 
in a safe and appropriate manner. The work of 

in fee-for-service environments need to become 
developing and delivering appropriate therapeu- 

familiar with record keeping and insurance billing 
tic exercise routines requires the ability to solve 

systems. A business background would be useful 
problems, collect information about the patient's 

for practitioners in private practice, and a person in 
or client’s condition, identify the therapeutic goals, 

Occupational Skills Analysis 

lf you are interested in entering an allied health profession, you will need to work toward a degree 
in kinesiology and become certified in a particular area. What other skills do you need to learn? 
Do you have good problem-solving and communication skills? Will you enjoy the business side of 
these professions—billing, record keeping, and so on? In what ways can you test the waters of 
these professions in order to see whether they are a good fit for you? 

Case Study in Ethics 

Suppose that you are an athletic trainer or physical therapist for Costello College. A family member 
refers a friend to you for examination and care. It seems that the friend, Pat, sprained an ankle while 
playing in a pickup basketball game. Immediately following the injury, Pat went to the emergency 
department for care. Several hours later, the physician ruled that there was no fracture. The laws 
in your state that define the scope of practice for an athletic trainer allow you to treat “anyone who 
is competing in, or preparing for, competition in organized athletics.” The physical therapy laws in 
your state allow treatment only by physician referral.” You explain to Pat that you cannot legally 
provide care. Pat says that he understands the law but views this as helping out a family friend. 

Your Decision 

Although friendship is important, the laws governing both physical therapy and athletic training 
preclude you from treating your family friend. The law specifies that the athlete must be injured 
during organized athletic participation in order for an athletic trainer to render services. It also 
states that a physician must specifically prescribe that a patient be treated by a physical therapist. 
Furthermore, since you would be providing care to Pat at Costello College, that would place the 
college at legal risk and potentially jeopardize your employment. Would you provide care to Pat? 

Resolution 

Your team physician at Costello College has a local private practice. To keep your care legal, you 
help Pat set up an appointment with your team physician. She can then refer Pat to you for legal 
treatment, thus keeping everything within the scope of the state laws regulating the practices of 
athletic trainers and physical therapists. 
*These laws are rare but do exist. 



Chapter 12 | Careers in Medicine and Allied Health 331 

any type of leadership position would benefit from also have an opportunity to do an internship or 
course work in management and administration. apprenticeship or find a part-time or summer job 

Medical and allied health professionals must in one of these areas. 
adhere to basic ethical and professional principles 
that are defined by state laws, professional member- 
ship organizations, and certification and licensure Wrap-Up 
agencies. Although the particulars vary from pro- Professions arise to fulfill a societal void. The 
fession to profession and from state to state, some therapeutic exercise professions fill a void either 
themes are common across the professions. For one by helping people to attain their desired level of 
thing, practitioners must adhere to the profession’s physical fitness (habilitation) or by helping injured 
scope of practice—the legal parameters that define persons to regain lost function (rehabilitation). 
the profession. Another tenet holds that the services Part of the attraction to this sphere of professional 
provided must be in the patient’s or client’s best practice comes from the variety of people you can 
interest, including use of the best scientific evidence serve. Highly skilled athletes, newborns, and the 
in the patient’s care. Practitioners must also maintain geriatric population—all may rely on therapeutic 
the confidentiality of medical records. Furthermore, exercise specialists. 
when services are billed to a third party, such as an Diversity also characterizes the settings in which 
insurance company, the service descriptions must therapeutic exercise professionals work. From the 
accurately represent the care provided. Although structured environments of hospitals and labora- 
your instructors and supervisors will identify these tories to the hectic atmosphere of athletic training 
issues for you, it is ultimately your responsibility to rooms, these work settings can accommodate a 
seek out relevant information and ensure that you wide range of interests. 
remain in compliance. Failure to do so could result This chapter covers some of the more prominent 
in criminal liability. medical and allied health professions, such as ath- 

How does one choose an area in which to work? letic training, cardiac rehabilitation, chiropractic, 
Although reading can provide you with an over- occupational therapy, physical therapy, medicine, 
view of these professions, the only way to discover and physician assistantships, as well as other medi- 
what a profession is really like is to see profession- cal and allied health careers that kinesiology majors 
als at work. Many professionals allow students to sometimes pursue. If you are interested in any of 
shadow them throughout the course of a day. You these professions, we encourage you to seek more 
may be able to make such a connection with the information from your professors or advisors and 
help of a professor or other acquaintance. You may explore this area in greater depth. 

_MORE INFORMATION ON CAREERS IN THERAPEUTIC EXERCISE 

Organizations 

American Academy of Orthotists and Prosthetists 

American Academy of Physician Assistants 

American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation 

American Board of Physician Specialties 

American Chiropractic Association 

American College of Sports Medicine 

American Dental Association 

American Kinesiotherapy Association 

American Occupational Therapy Association 

American Osteopathic Association 

American Medical Association 

American Physical Therapy Association 

American Therapeutic Recreation Association 



Me 332 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Canadian Association of Occupational Therapists 

Canadian Athletic Therapists Association 

National Athletic Trainers’ Association 

National Strength and Conditioning Association 

Journals 
American Journal of Occupational Therapy 

Annual in Therapeutic Recreation 

Athletic Training and Sports Health Care 

Canadian Journal of Occupational Therapy 

Clinical Kinesiology 

International Journal of Athletic Therapy and Training 

Journal of Athletic Training 

Journal of Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation and Prevention 

Journal of Chiropractic Medicine 

Journal of Clinical Exercise Physiology 

Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy 

Journal of Prosthetics and Orthotics 

Journal of Sport Rehabilitation 

Journal of Strength & Conditioning Research 

Journal of the American Academy of Physician Assistants 

Physical Therapy 

Physical Therapy in Sport 

Spine 

Sports Health 

Sports Medicine 

Strength and Conditioning Journal 

Therapeutic Recreation Journal 

ReEVIEW QUESTIONS e 
1. Describe how therapeutic exercise promotes healthy lifestyles. 

2. Discuss the similarities and differences between habilitation and rehabilitation. 

3. Identify the common overlaps among the medical and allied health professions described 
in this chapter. 

4. What skills or attributes are unique to the therapeutic professions presented in this chapter 
compared to other kinesiology professions? 

5. To make themselves more marketable, many people obtain multiple credentials or spe- 
cializations. Describe some possibilities for dual credentials and cross-training based on 
the descriptions of professions given in this chapter. What benefits are provided by dual 
credentials and cross-training? What professions not described in this chapter would also 
lend themselves to dual credentials? 

is | K Prope |» ) Go to HKPropel to complete the activities for this chapter. 



Careers in Teaching 
Physical Education 

Kim C. Graber and Thomas J. Templin 

In this chapter, we will 2 

e describe what a physical education teacher does, — 

e provide insights into exciting research, _ 

e explain how to remain current in the field,  . 
e describe how teachers become licensed, 2 

e describe settings in which physical educators teach, = : 

e describe highly effective teachers, and 

provide information about career options. 



Sitting ON the bleachers in the gymnasium, Ms. Sanchez could hardly believe it was mid-se- 
mester. She had been observing and providing helpful feedback to some of the new physical 

education teachers she had hired only months ago. In her role as department head and director 

of physical activity programming for the school, Ms. Sanchez was determined to foster in her 

teachers the same sense of dedication she had to student learning when she taught her classes. 

She paused from her note taking to reflect on her first few months as a new teacher 25 
years earlier and thought, “Where did the time go? So much has changed.” When she began her 
career, Ms. Sanchez felt isolated and too frightened to approach some of the veteran teachers 
for feedback she desperately wanted. Chuckling to herself, she realized they would have been 
happy to help had she only asked. To make sure these teachers didn’t feel the same isolation she 
experienced, Ms. Sanchez assigned them to be mentored by her most experienced and effective eae 

veteran teachers, and she established weekly meetings where all 11 teachers in the department 
could develop a community of practice in which they could engage and learn from each other 
about effective teaching strategies, generate innovative curricular approaches, and discuss how 
to encourage additional physical activity opportunities for students outside of physical education 
class. It worked. Students accepted the new curriculum, which emphasized high levels of physical 
activity while fostering social and emotional development. Veteran teachers felt re-energized, and 
new teachers felt supported. Ms. Sanchez was pleased because she understood the importance 
of physical education in promoting public health. 

After finishing her observation, Ms. Sanchez walked into the conference room of her principal, 
who was hosting a meeting of all department heads. The topic for today, as it had been for 3 

eee, 

previous weeks, was finalizing plans for a new after-school physical activity program that would 
be led by volunteer classroom-based and physical education teachers. A number of other exciting 
initiatives to encourage physical activity throughout the school day had already been implemented, 
such as periodic physical activity breaks and providing students the option of using standing 

eEh A 

versus sitting desks. 
The urban school in which she taught had a limited budget, but Ms. Sanchez located a donor while 

attending a state physical education conference who had expressed a desire to contribute money to 
ruieed 

@ school interested in facilitating physical activity through physical education and other initiatives. 
In collaboration with her assistant principal, Ms. Sanchez wrote a grant application and was funded. 
She was invited to oversee programming to infuse the school with activities that promoted health, 
wellness, and a commitment to physical activity. Although a great deal had already 
been accomplished, Ms. Sanchez 
knew this was only the 
beginning. The hardest 
part would be permanently 
changing school culture so 
these new efforts would 
be sustainable for years to 
come. That meant getting 
buy-in from students, fac- 
ulty, administrators, and par- 
ents, and mentoring those 
with leadership potential 
to continue her efforts long 
after she retired. Sitting on 
the bus on her way home 7 
from work, Ms. Sanchez 
thought, “Although 25 years 
has passed, this is only the 
beginning.” 



Chapter 13| Careers in Teaching Physical Education 335 i 

As a participant in a physical education class, you ¢ How can you promote skill development? 
may have been concerned about improving your ¢ How will you ensure that students pay atten- 
performance and fitness levels, playing well during tion and are engaged in the subject matter? 
competition, or simply enjoying the experience. 
You may have felt proud of your ability * How will you convey your instructions to 

, hard work, 
and dedication when you tur students? 

ned in an especially 
successful performance. The truth is that if your ¢ How will you structure classes to ensure that 
performance improved, and if you enjoyed the expe- all students are learning? 
rience, then your teacher was largely responsible. ¢ How will you design a curriculum so that 

Effective teachers understand their subject and you can also provide students with social 
know how to convey it appropriately. For example, and emotional skills? 
expert teachers in river rafting know which tech- ¢ How will you motivate students to engage in 
niques should be used to propel a raft when the river physical activity outside of the school setting? 
is smooth as opposed to when it is at its most danger- 

¢ How can you encourage students to make 
ous. They understand when to expect a change in the 

healthy choices? 
conditions of the river and how to maneuver safely 
and effectively from one type of water to another. A person with a background in pedagogy knows 
Good teachers also know which techniques are the answers to these questions. For example, a 
most appropriate for novices and which are best for knowledgeable teacher knows that the best way 
experts. They give clear instructions and provide the to get and keep students’ attention is to establish 
best practice opportunities to help learners develop rules and procedures for good behavior in the 
new skills. Good teachers also integrate technology gymnasium and on the playing field. An effective 
into lessons when appropriate. They also know how teacher with a background in pedagogy knows 
to diagnose movement and provide meaningful feed- that practicing a skill correctly and in gamelike 
back to help students improve. situations is more important than listening to a 

Successful teaching requires a background in 20-minute lecture on basketball techniques. 
and a knowledge of the curriculum. It also requires An effective teacher also understands the crit- 
strong pedagogical (teaching) knowledge about ical importance of physical activity to children’s 
physical education. If they haven’t mastered effec- health. The teacher knows that 17 percent of 
tive pedagogy, physical activity instructors may youth (Ogden et al., 2015) and 40 percent of 
“wing it.” This can sometimes work out in the short younger adults (Hales et al., 2020) in the United 
run, but it often leads to wasted time and effort, States are considered obese and that many do not 
stress for the teacher, and lack of student learning. receive adequate physical education or engage in 
In the opening scenario, Ms. Sanchez was invited to recommended levels of physical activity (Society 
serve as department head and director of physical of Health and Physical Educators and American 
activity programming because she demonstrated Heart Association, 2016). An effective teacher also 

effective teaching behaviors in her own classes, believes that these negative trends can be reversed 
was committed to helping other teachers succeed, in part through effective physical education. 
and had a desire to infuse physical activity through- Although most teaching in physical education 
out the school curriculum. More specifically, she occurs in-person in a classroom setting, it should 
exhibited knowledge of curriculum development, be noted that an increasing number of schools are 
understood effective pedagogy, and put these qual- adding optional or required elements of online 
ifications to good use with her students. She also physical education into the curriculum. In some 
understood the importance of physical education cases, teachers supplement their instruction by 
and physical activity in promoting public health ini- asking students to view an online presentation 

tiatives. Further, by working collegially with others, before coming to class. In other cases, some schools 

Ms. Sanchez was garnering schoolwide support are offering online physical education in place of 

for physical education, and the relationships she in-person physical education, particularly at the 

developed with other teachers would help ensure high school level. These initiatives are in response 

they would be there for each other in times of need, to public health concerns related to a lack of phys- 

such as times of illness or disability. ical activity opportunities for students and with 

Before you read further, consider these questions: the hope that this form of physical education will 
further increase students’ physical activity levels. 

* If you become a physical education teacher, 
Pedagogy is the art, science, and profession of 

how will you motivate students to engage 
teaching. Effective pedagogy focuses on instruc- 

in physical activity and acquire new skills? 



GE 336 Introduction to Kinesiology 

tional behaviors that produce learning in students. education teachers, exercise instructors for older 

Effective teachers use evidence-based instructional adults, and even rehabilitation therapists who help 

strategies, develop thoughtful lesson plans based patients relearn basic movement skills after an 

on students’ needs, and engage students in a cur- illness or accident. 
riculum that fosters learning. Rather than approach Experts in physical education teaching have 

each class with the question, “What am I going to many career options. Most elect to obtain licensure 
teach today?” the most effective teachers instead ask and become teachers or coaches in K-12 schools. 
themselves, “What are my students going to learn Some choose to work at the elementary level 
today, and what instructional strategies and curricu- because they like interacting with young children 
lum will make that possible?” This focus on learning and appreciate the enjoyment that youngsters expe- 
can improve the interaction between the learner and rience while engaged in physical activity. Others 
the teacher and lead to better education for students. decide to work in a middle school or high school 
Ideally, then, those who pursue a career in teaching because they enjoy mentoring older children or 
are concerned with producing learning in students. wish to coach. As a means of supplementing their 

Whether you want to become a physical edu- salaries, some teachers also work in the role of 
cation teacher, a physical activity director, or a referee, school physical activity facilitator, or rec- 
high school coach, you need to learn the skills of reation leader. 
effective pedagogy. Prospective teachers typically Some people who enter a department of kinesiol- 
gain pedagogical knowledge through an accredited ogy in order to become physical activity instructors 
teacher education program at a college or univer- do not intend to teach in a public school. Instead, 
sity. They also learn by working with a mentor, they decide that they are better suited to teach- 
such as a cooperating teacher in a public school, ing in a private school or community recreation 
by attending a teachers’ conference, or by reading center. Some elect to become specialists, such as 
a professional journal. wilderness experts or professional golf instructors. 

Others choose to become instructors or professors 
at a college or university. Most, however, choose to 

What Is the Teaching become physical activity instructors because they 

of Physical Education? are interested in helping people improve their 
health and wellness levels, engaging people in 

This chapter introduces you to the teaching of physical activities throughout their life span, and 
physical education, sometimes referred to as sport working with children and youth in schools. 
pedagogy. As you read this chapter, think of your 
educational experiences thus far, and ask yourself 
whether you received effective instruction—and Influence of Experience on Your Beliefs 
why or why not. Consider how you might use some Research has long demonstrated that undergradu- 
of the research findings discussed in this chapter, ate students who are interested in teaching often 
particularly if these findings contradict your expe- believe that they already know all there is to know 
riences as a student. Because most of the research about teaching and have little more to learn (Lanier 
on pedagogy focuses on teaching in K-12 public & Little, 1986). This belief may be the result of 
schools, much of this chapter addresses public experiences one has as a student in K-12 physical 
school physical education. However, pedagogy education, as an athlete on a team, or as a summer 
can be applied to other types of physical activity park district physical activity leader. Consider that 
instruction—for example, instruction delivered by you have spent approximately 13,000 hours as a 
community recreation directors, coaches, special student in K-12 schools (Lortie, 1975) and count- 

How Would You Rate Your Experiences in Physical Education Class? 

Reflect on your own experience by answering the following questions: 

» Who stands out in your memory as the best physical education teacher you ever had? 
» What specific qualities made this teacher effective? 

» Who stands out in your memory as the worst physical education teacher you ever had? 
>» What were this teacher’s weaknesses, or what qualities made him or her ineffective? 
» What do you think are the most important traits for a teacher to have? Why? 



Chapter 13| Careers in Teaching Physical Education 337 

less hours in other physical activity settings before You might believe that athletes should be released 
entering a college or university. Through these from class before a game, that better players should 
experiences, you have developed many strong demonstrate their skills for the benefit of others, 
beliefs about teaching. and that higher-skilled students should receive 

more Opportunities for activity than lower-skilled 
students. Despite your personal experience, how- 

JS0 0) Pe a ever, these beliefs are mistaken, because they are 
All instructors are influenced by their experiences in based on unsound, unjust, or unproven teaching 

K-12 schooling and other educational settings. The best principles. 

instructors, however, ground their programs and teaching Imagine how the scenario might have been 

methods in evidence-based pedagogical knowledge different. If your teacher wanted all students to 
enjoy volleyball, he or she might have spent many 

acquired during their professional preparation. 
hours planning to ensure that everyone had an 
opportunity to improve their skills and experience 

Despite the logic of emulating someone whose success. In addition, your teacher wouldn’t want 
qualities you admire, relying only on experience has you to miss class on game days, because physical 

some drawbacks. Because teachers influence different education is another opportunity to improve your 

students in different ways, you cannot assume that skill level. This teacher’s practices would have been 

everyone had the same experiences with a partic- grounded in effective pedagogy. 

ular instructor. Nor can you assume that a teacher Although it is human nature to accept and imi- 

was effective simply because everyone liked him or tate the behavior of people you respect—and to 

her. For example, if you were a starter on your high reject the behavior of those you do not—personal 

school’s volleyball team, your physical education experience alone cannot make you an effective 

teacher may have allowed you to skip class on game teacher. A better approach for learning how to 

days, asked you to demonstrate bumping and setting teach is to analyze the available research about 

skills to classmates, and given you more opportunities teaching and learning and to base your behavior 

than others to play during class. and values on this analysis. You can always reflect 

Such personal experiences might lead you to back on your personal experience, but it should 

believe that your teacher’s pedagogy was sound. never be your only criterion for teaching. 

To be an effective teacher, you must rely on more than your own personal experiences. 

© Human Kinetics 



GE 338 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Research on Effective Teaching basketball, football, volleyball, soccer, or the like. If 

you are now interested in pursuing a career in the 
We can learn much about what teachers do by 

physical activity field, you probably had above-av- 
examining the wealth of research that has been 

erage skills in these games and sports; for instance, 
conducted in this area. Research on teaching exam- 

you may have enjoyed eliminating other students 
ines the teaching and learning process that occurs in dodgeball or scoring the winning goal in soccer. 
in educational settings such as public schools or Such memories probably remain satisfying for you 
private schools. Researchers in a typical study and likely stimulated your interest in a physical 
might try to determine whether students learn 

education career. 
better through one curricular method or through Unfortunately, some of your classmates probably 
another. These researchers might examine two dif- did not share your positive experiences of physical 
ferent curricular approaches and compare whether activity. For students who were less skilled—the 
students acquired better skills from an innovative ones that you quickly eliminated from games such 
model or from a traditional one. Other researchers as dodgeball—physical activity time was at best 
might investigate whether students who receive supervised recess, and at worst an opportunity 
more practice opportunities during class learn 

for embarrassment. For most of those students, 
more than those who receive fewer opportunities. 

no instruction was available; thus, they had little 
Many of the findings about effective teaching are 

chance of improving their skills. Think about it: 
transferable from one setting to another—a school 

Did you acquire your athletic skills mainly by par- 
to a recreation center, for example. 

ticipating in physical education class? Or did you 
Over the past three decades, scholars have 

acquire them through free play or extracurricular 
undertaken many types of investigations and 

activities organized by coaches (or parents) who 
examined many aspects of teaching. For instance, 

were determined to help you improve your play- 
researchers have studied the characteristics of 

ing ability? Could more equitable physical activity 
effective teachers and their classrooms. Although 

experiences in physical education be designed so 
most research examining the effectiveness of 

everyone could improve? 
physical activity instruction has been conducted 

For students to succeed at any skill, they must 
in the realm of physical education, many of the 

be exposed to appropriate practice. Teachers must 
findings are easily transferable to other educational 

provide students with adequate opportunities to 
settings. Therefore, research conducted in schools 

practice skills while simultaneously ensuring that 
can inform the work of physical activity instructors 

they are practicing these skills appropriately. For 
in other settings. 

example, if students practice throwing skills with- 
Do you recall the many times as a student when 

out taking a step with the foot opposite the throw- 
you had to wait in line for a turn? You may have 

ing arm when releasing the ball, inappropriate form 
had to wait through half the class period for an 

will be reinforced, and students will not improve 
opportunity, say, to try the high jump or walk on 

their throwing skill as quickly as they would if they 
the balance beam. Or maybe you played volleyball 

received appropriate instruction. Thus, it’s essential 
with 11 others on your side of the net, waiting 

that teachers watch and give feedback to students 
minutes at a time for a chance to touch the ball. If 

so they can correct inappropriate form, and it’s 
this sounds familiar, you’re not alone. Thousands 

essential that students have sufficient opportuni- 
of students each year receive inadequate oppor- 

ties to engage in appropriate practice. Ideally, this 
tunities to practice and learn new skills, and they 

should be done while also engaging students in 
have inadequate amounts of physical activity in a 

high levels of physical activity. 
subject that is supposed to keep them engaged. 

Effective Class Management and Discipline 
Appropriate Practice Experiences for Students 

One of the greatest challenges for teachers is class 
Your early experiences in physical education, rec- 

discipline. How would you handle a student who 
reation, or camp settings may have been similar 

refuses to follow instructions? How would you deal 
to those of many of your age peers. If so, your 

with a student who ridicules or bullies other stu- 
teachers and counselors probably had you play 

dents? Such questions about class management 
dodgeball, kickball, “steal the bacon,” and other and 

discipline tend to top the list of common 
such games. As you progressed into the middle concerns 

among new teachers. Class management 
and high school grades, you may have received involves 

organizing students in such a 
a few days of instruction before playing softball, way that learning is 

most likely to occur, whereas discipline involves 



Chapter 13| Careers in Teaching Physical Education 339 i 

Research and Evidence-Based Practice in Kinesiology 
Active Learning Time and Engagement in Physical Activity 

Some of the most significant research to have made an impact on the field of physical education 
relates to the amount of time that students are actively engaged during class. Research conducted in 
the classroom over three decades ago (Brophy & Good, 1986) clearly linked student achievement to 
time on task. This research had a major impact on the way in which effective instruction in physical 
education has been evaluated and discussed ever since. Also called engaged time, time on task 
consists of the time that students spend doing physical activity or sport. Unfortunately, engaged 
time has been low in many physical activity settings. In fact, for many years pedagogy research 
reported that students in traditional physical education classes spent only about 30 percent of 
class time engaged in physical activity (Anderson & Barrette, 1978; Metzler, 1979, 1989). What 
were they doing instead? Historically, students have spent 50 percent to 70 percent of their class 
time waiting, transitioning, and being managed by the teacher. Although attempts are being made 
to train future teachers to engage students in activity for at least 50 percent of class time—which 
is what experts recommend—schools still struggle to meet this goal, and the patterns identified 
in the latter part of the 20th century continue to characterize many physical education classes 
(McKenzie & Lounsbery, 2009; Metzler et al., 2013b). Increased emphasis is also being placed 
on ensuring that students are appropriately engaged—that is, performing correctly with frequent 
success. Such time is often called academic learning time or functional learning time. 

For some students, physical education class is the only opportunity during the school day to 
engage in physical activity. Therefore, teachers must keep students active (and successful). This 
is even more important when considered in the light of the obesity epidemic and the high rates 
of physical inactivity found throughout the world. Thus, physical education teachers must be com- 
mitted to keeping students moving in appropriate learning activities for the majority of the class 
period. Evidence-based curricular models focused on health-optimizing physical education have 
demonstrated that children can acquire knowledge, improve performance skills, and increase levels 
of moderate to vigorous physical activity (MVPA) when teachers are trained appropriately in these 
models of instruction. To learn more about evidence-based models that have proven particularly 
effective, we suggest you read the following article: 

Sallis, J.£, McKenzie, T.L., Beets, M.W., Beighle, A., Erwin, H., & Lee, S. (2012). Physical education’s role in public health: Steps forward 
and backward over 20 years and HOPE for the future. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 83(2), 125-135. 

Are You Suited for a Career in Teaching Physical Education? 

Do you enjoy helping others learn? Do you like working with children? How do you feel about 

long but fulfilling work days? Would you like to work in an environment where you can share your 

enjoyment of physical activity with others? If you gave positive answers to these questions, then 

you may be well suited for a career as a physical education instructor. 

establishing rules, enforcing them, and rewarding KEY POINT 

exceptional behavior. Regardless of their experi- It is important to set high expectations for students 
ence level, eee Se Te NS aL tS Hele Ne ANS and to enforce rules and routines, particularly at the 
= uations (ey att CO Mee Re coe beginning of the academic year, so students clearly 
EO CAINS ENS CAN eerie eet understand a teacher's expectations, how rules will 
in class management and discipline because their 
classes are much larger than those of most class- be enforced, and consequences for breaking the rules. 

room-based teachers, and students are moving and 

interacting with others throughout the class and 

not simply sitting at a desk in a classroom. 



Ml 340 Introduction to Kinesiology 

The best thing instructors can do to create a lists of student performance, and observations of 

well-managed class environment is to take pro- students engaged in game play. Teachers may also 

active measures that tend to minimize potential assess achievement by asking students to complete 

difficulties. Graham and colleagues (2020) have a portfolio of what they learned during a unit of 

suggested ways to create a positive learning envi- instruction. 

ronment. In general, use the first few classes of a Many states have established learning standards 

new academic year or unit to establish and imple- that specify what physically literate (physically 
ment rules and procedures for good behavior. For educated) people should know and be able to do 
example, in a physical education class, students as a result of physical education. Many of these 
need to learn the new teacher’s signals, such as start standards are based on SHAPE America National 
and stop signals and other signs to look or listen Standards and Grade-Level Outcomes (Society of 
for during class. These signals and signs tell stu- Health and Physical Educators, 2014). Schools 
dents to behave in a certain way or let them know are increasingly being held accountable for stan- 
that a particular behavior choice is good or bad. If dards-based student learning, and a greater number 
students learn such lessons early, then the entire of teachers are beginning to use formal assessments 
school year will run more smoothly for the class. in physical education. To aid in this process, SHAPE 

In a classic study of seven effective elementary America has published a series of assessments, 
specialists, instructors were observed teaching stu- called PE Metrics, that match the national standards 

dents the stopping and starting signals for class by and are designed to inform teachers, students, 
using the signals a total of 346 times during the first parents, and others about whether students are 
few days of instruction (Fink & Siedentop, 1989). meeting the national standards for their age level 
After the first few classes, most students were (Society of Health and Physical Educators, 2019). 
behaving appropriately, and teachers promptly rep- These assessments have undergone rigorous testing 
rimanded those who did not follow the signals. By to ensure their validity and reliability. FitnessGram 
implementing this routine during the first few days is another measurement tool that is widely used by 
of every unit, these teachers quickly constructed an teachers to accurately assess students for health-re- 
environment in which learning could take place. lated fitness (Cooper Institute, 2017). 

Students also learn how to behave in class Student assessment is linked to teacher evalua- 
through clearly stated and consistently enforced tion. At present, most states require that teachers 
expectations. One instructor characteristic that be evaluated on two or more measures, such as 
promotes appropriate student behavior is called student learning metrics and classroom observa- 
with-it-ness. Teachers demonstrate their with-it- tion. The practice of evaluating physical education 
ness by knowing what’s happening in the learn- teachers on the basis of student learning (e.g., 
ing environment and displaying their awareness knowledge acquisition, skill development, fitness 
through verbal or other forms of communication development, or personal-social development) is 
with students. By holding students accountable for grounded in teacher accountability. Legislators, 
their actions, these teachers reduce the likelihood parents, school administrators, and others want to 
that students will try to manipulate the learning make sure that teachers are performing at a high 
environment. level and that children are learning in physical 

education classes. Therefore, future teachers in 
Assessment physical education teacher education (PETE) pro- 
The Society of Health and Physical Educators grams should understand that once they become 
(SHAPE) (2015) contends that student assessment certified, they will be evaluated annually, and they 
is an essential component of physical education. must have the tools to assess student learning in 
Effective teachers understand the importance of order to demonstrate their own effectiveness. 
assessing student achievement. They don’t base 
their grades on whether students attend class and 
try hard. They use formative assessment to deter- KeEY POINL e2 2 e 
mine whether students are learning the content Learning how to implement new procedures, such as 
of a unit as it progresses; then, at the end of the new state-mandated teacher evaluation systems, is 
unit, they use summative assessment to determine difficult for some teachers because they already have 
whether students have acquired the relevant skills 

many responsibilities and are often more comfortable 
and knowledge. Assessments of learning may 

with procedures that are familiar. 
include written and physical skills tests, check- SS



Chapter 13| Careers in Teaching Physical Education 341 

Case Study in Assessment 

After being offered several teaching positions, Nakita Jones accepted her first job as a physical 
education teacher at Chavez Middle School. She did so because Mr. Carson, the principal, believed 
strongly in the importance of physical education. He was committed to the idea that physical 
education is an integral component of public health, and he believed that high levels of physical 
education during school could help address the obesity epidemic. 

After starting her new position, Ms. Jones noticed that many of her physical education teacher 
colleagues did not care about assessment, despite the existence of new state-mandated teacher 
evaluation systems that assessed both teacher performance and student learning outcomes. As 
an undergraduate, she had learned the importance of assessing student performance. She had 
used both PE Metrics and FitnessGram to assess students during her student teaching experience. 

Ms. Jones decided to grade her students at Chavez on their skill improvement, knowledge, 
and independent engagement in physical activity outside of school. In addition, she would use 
FitnessGram to provide them with information about their personal fitness levels, which would not 
be graded. The skill improvement portion of a student’s grade would be based on performance 
improvement from pretest to post-test; more specifically, students would take a skill pretest before 
each unit and a posttest at the end of the unit based on PE Metrics. Knowledge development 
would be assessed by means of cognitive paper-and-pencil exams. Independent engagement 
would be determined through a physical activity student portfolio that included daily physical 
activity records, step counts using pedometers, and personal accounts from students about their 
experiences while engaging in activity outside of physical education. 

During a conversation with her colleague, Mr. Mason, a veteran of 20 years at the school, he 
began to complain that because of the new teacher evaluation system, his performance would 
be assessed based on student learning. He felt this was very unfair because he had many years 
of experience at the school. Because Mr. Mason appeared so frustrated, Ms. Jones suggested 
that her model would help because it was grounded in recent research, and she even offered to 
help guide him through the process. After a few minutes, however, she could tell that the inter- 
action wasn’t going well. Before long, Mr. Mason’s face turned bright red, and he barked, “I don’t 
care about the new system. | plan to evaluate students in the same way | always have. It’s what 
students like. If the kids show up and dress, they get an A. That’s the way it’s going to be. | don’t 
care about the new evaluation system, and our principal won’t worry about it either. New teachers 
come in with ideas they learned at the university, and they act superior to me, but they don’t have 
the experience that | do.” Ms. Jones was shocked and angered. She maintained her composure 
with Mr. Mason but said, “I think it’s best that we talk to Mr. Carson about this.” 

Your Decision 

Was Ms. Jones’s assessment system superior to Mr. Mason’s? Why or why not? Do you think 
Ms. Jones should have implied her system was better? Based on your experience, how likely is it 
that other veteran physical educators might react similarly to Mr. Mason? Do you think Ms. Jones 
should have threatened to go to the principal? How would you have handled the situation? 

Resolution 

Ms. Jones, Mr. Mason, and Mr. Carson met to discuss the assessment challenge. Even though 

Mr. Carson had been a colleague of Mr. Mason for more than 10 years, he was emphatic in his 

support for Ms. Jones. Moreover, he told Mr. Mason that perhaps it was time for the “old dog to 

learn some new tricks” from this beginning teacher. He went on to explain that because of the new 

state standards related to teacher evaluation, it was time for all of the teaching staff at Chavez to 

implement state-of-the-art techniques, including student assessment. With some hesitation, Mr. 

Mason consented, and Ms. Jones felt relieved, albeit certainly cautious about future interactions 

with her new colleague. 



Mg 342 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Feedback input and used a teacher-dominated approach. 

Although a traditional approach can be effective 
In addition to providing clear instructions, teachers 

when used by a creative teacher, alternative curricu- 
must also provide clear, specific, and immediate 

lums offer strong promise and can be implemented 
feedback (Rink, 2006). Unfortunately, physical 

in many different environments. 
education teachers sometimes provide too many 

Physical education today is more exciting than 
instructions, whereupon students either get bored 

ever before. Although the obesity epidemic is a 
and stop listening or try to listen but fail to remem- 

serious health concern, it has at least motivated 
ber everything the teacher says. In contrast, during 

teachers to improve their physical education pro- 
practice, teachers seldom provide students with 

grams. You may have heard the term new physical 
an adequate amount of feedback that is correct, 

education. This movement is made up of teach- 
prompt, and specific. 

ers who incorporate novel and exciting learning 
Research and our own experiences indicate 

ideas into their classes—and especially those who 
that teachers make the following mistakes when 

emphasize fitness and nontraditional activities 
providing feedback. 

such as cycling, rock climbing, and in-line skating. 
* Feedback is often incorrect. For example, a In fact, these teachers are sometimes profiled in 

teacher may not see the fundamental error the national media as having changed the face of 
a student commits and may focus instead on physical education. 
a secondary feature of performance. 

* Teachers sometimes focus on an aspect of 
performance that does not require feedback 
while neglecting an area that does require 
feedback. For example, Stroot and Oslin 
(1993) found that teachers neglected to 
provide feedback on a component of the 
overhead throw because they were unable 
to diagnose deficits; instead, they provided 
feedback about aspects that students had 
already mastered. 

¢ Some teachers do not time their feedback 
so that the learner receives prompt help 
when practice trials feature defective form 
or produce unsuccessful results. This is 
unfortunate because practicing incorrect 
performance will produce predictably neg- 
ative results! 

¢ Teachers provide less feedback during game 
play. However, feedback provided during 
game play can be valuable; it gives all stu- 
dents information about ways to improve. 

PeRE EOIN ee  
Teachers can make instruction more likely to be 
effective by providing appropriate learning activities; 
maximal active learning time; and feedback that is 
correct, prompt, and specific. 

Alternative Curriculums 
Alternati

You and most of your classmates were likely ve curriculums offer exciting possibilities to stu- 
dents who may not be interested 

exposed to a traditional curriculum in which in traditional activities. 
© Human Kinetics 

instructors designed activities with little student 



Chapter 13| Careers in Teaching Physical Education 

Physical education teachers can structure their >» The wilderness and adventure education 
curriculum in many ways. Here are different forms curriculum, sometimes referred to as outdoor and 
of curriculum that are used in K-12 schools: adventure education, introduces learners to such 

» The elective curriculum allows learners to activities as canoeing, backpacking, camping, 
choose one activity from a wide selection of options white-water rafting, skiing, first aid, ropes courses, 
that encourage them to develop skills that will climbing walls, and new and cooperative games. 
transfer into a lifetime interest in that activity. This Evidence suggests that wilderness and adventure 
approach is offered by many large-school programs education can be highly appealing to students 
and may include activities like aerobics, basketball, (Dyson, 1995). 
weight training, volleyball, badminton, and other >» The social development model is concerned 
popular sports. Some high school programs take with teaching students self-control and responsibil- 
an approach similar to that of a fitness club by ity and draws heavily on the pioneering efforts of 
allowing students to select classes that match their Hellison (2011). This model is particularly effective 
fitness and developmental needs. in environments in which students have not had 

>» The fitness curriculum emphasizes cardiore- opportunities to develop personal responsibility 

spiratory efficiency, muscular strength and endur- and positive social skills. 

ance, flexibility, and body composition, particularly >» The teaching games for understanding 
at the secondary level. Students learn concepts model has received increasing attention from both 
about and participate in health-related fitness teachers and researchers. Whereas the traditional 
activities such as running, swimming, circuit train- way of teaching games seeks first to ensure that stu- 
ing, cycling, in-line skating, and aerobics (Corbin dents have acquired the motor skills they need for 
et al., 2019). This type of curriculum is becoming game play, this model emphasizes teaching tactical 
increasingly popular because it is perceived as a awareness, game strategies, and game appreciation 
way to address public health concerns like the while placing less emphasis on initial motor skill 
obesity epidemic. If implemented appropriately, a development (Mitchell et al., 2013). 
fitness curriculum contributes to the public health 
agenda by giving students a chance to engage in 
enjoyable, moderate-to-vigorous physical activity. 2 KEY POINT Sa Se 
Physical educators must not forget, however, that Effective teachers seek to implement curricular models 
it is equally important to teach skills to students so that are interesting to students and produce the great- 
that they can engage successfully in many activities est opportunity for student learning and engagement 
throughout their lives. in physical activity. 

>» The sport education model appears to hold 
promise particularly as a means of improving sec- 
ondary physical education (Siedentop et al., 2011). Physical Activity 
In this approach, teachers treat students as athletes. 

and Academic Performance 
Students are formed into teams and not only learn 
how to play but also assume some responsibility As a prospective physical activity expert, you will 
for roles as managers, coaches, trainers, officials, be asked to expound on the benefits of your work 
statisticians, and tournament administrators. with learners. According to a worldwide consensus 

Summary of Key Evidence-Based Pedagogical Principles 

Learn from your experiences and strive to acquire new knowledge to achieve expertise. 

Provide appropriate practice. 

Provide a large amount of academic learning time. 

Always be concerned about class management and discipline. 

Assess student learning. 

Provide clear, specific feedback. 

WNTAE TT  Develop knowledge about alternative curricular models. 



ma 344 Introduction to Kinesiology 

of scholars (Bangsbo et al., 2016), students and * Being physically fit and having a lower body 

clients likely benefit from physical activity in major mass index (BMI) appear to be positively 

ways related to fitness and health, cognitive func- associated with academic performance. 

tion, and psychological and social well-being. The * Extending physical education is associated 
research on the cognitive benefits is particularly positively with higher math, reading, and 
important for our focus here. Although the pri- writing test scores. 
mary goals of physical activity leaders are to meet « Although the research is inconsistent, 
objectives related to skill development, fitness, and 

some studies reveal a positive relationship 
activity, the movement experiences they facilitate 

between participation in interscholastic 
also enhance cognitive health, which in children 

sport and academic performance. 
is measured as academic achievement. 

The relationships between physical activity, * Opportunities for physical activity before, 

fitness, cognition, and academic achievement are during, and after the school day should be 

outlined in a systematic review sponsored by the encouraged by principals and teachers in 

American College of Sports Medicine (Donnelly et all subjects and should become a part of 

al., 2016). Donnelly and colleagues defined aca- ongoing school policy. 

demic achievement as the degree to which educa- This area of research is still evolving. Although 
tional goals were achieved by an individual, which there are many positive connections among 
could be expressed in terms of a standardized test physical activity, physical education, cognitive 
score, grades, or school attendance. A relationship development, and academic performance, you 
also appears to exist between engagement in phys- should follow the research literature to remain 
ical activity and academic performance, which can informed about future findings. When teachers can 
be defined as having the following three compo- demonstrate that physical education can enhance 
nents (Rasberry et al., 2011): cognitive performance, they can advocate more 

1. Cognitive skills and attitudes: basic cog- knowledgeably for their programs when talking 

nitive abilities such as executive function, with skeptics or with those who believe that more 

memory, attention, information processing, time spent on physical education will cause aca- 

motivation, and self-concept demic performance to suffer. 

2. Academic behaviors; on-task behavior, orga- 
nization, planning, attendance, emotional Professional Issues and Prerequisites 
control Most teachers base their teaching practices on their 

3. Academic achievement: test scores, other own experiences as students, what they learned 
formal assessment results, grade point during their teacher education program, informal 
average discussions with other instructors, and in-service 

workshops and conferences. They should also sub- 
Although improving test scores should not be scribe to professional journals to remain current 

the primary goal of physical education class, par- and cutting-edge. 
ticipation in physical activity is important for daily 
growth and development and for maintenance 
of cognitive functioning. Several comprehensive _eKEY POINT e2 e 
reviews of the literature on this topic have found 

Although professional practice knowledge is a powerful 
positive associations between physical activity and 

source of information, it cannot substitute for thought- 
academic performance (e.g., Castelli et al., 2014; 
Howie & Pate, 2012): ful consideration of the available research literature 

on effective teaching. 
¢ Participation in ongoing physical activity is 

beneficial to academic performance. 

* There is no adverse effect on academic In addition to what they learn outside of 

performance of spending additional time instruction hours, teachers acquire much of their 

in physical education rather than more pedagogical expertise from professional practice. 

time in other subjects. Thus, children can Over hours, weeks, and years of instructional expe- 

be offered opportunities to be active across rience, teachers learn (often the hard way!) which 

the school day without sacrificing academic techniques work well with students and which do 
performance. not. Instructors and coaches often refer to their 



Chapter 13| Careers in Teaching Physical Education 345 

professional practice knowledge when explaining journals, taking graduate classes, or attending profes- 
their instructional decisions to others. sional conferences. In contrast, expert teachers—and 

Nevertheless, as valuable as personal experi- all of those who continue to learn about teaching by 
ence can be, it is a serious mistake for teachers or reading and by attending professional conferences— 
coaches to look to personal experience as their only are less likely to experience burnout. 
guide to how to teach or coach. Enough scholarly 
research has now been done that any teacher, no 
matter how experienced, can learn from research. BiG COIN ee ee eee 
This is particularly important because pedagogical Teaching experience alone does not guarantee expertise. 
research has less bias and the potential for wider 
application than does personal experience, which 
is of course limited to the students and situations Role Conflict, Burnout, and Resilience 
that a given teacher has encountered. Teaching is a very demanding job, and the rigors of 

Research sometimes seems inaccessible to the teaching role must be managed on a daily basis 
instructors because it can be difficult to under- in combination with other roles (e.g., coach, student 
stand or does not apply directly to their situations. club sponsor, school committee member, cafeteria 
Even so, scholarly study has influenced the ways monitor, bus supervisor). Your ability to perform in 
in which instructors teach physical education. For multiple roles while teaching physical education may 
example, instructors now have a vocabulary for determine your ability to perform the teaching role 
discussing issues such as academic learning time, competently. Moreover, a teacher may hold a second 
management time, off-task student behaviors, and job, shoulder family responsibilities, or volunteer 
quick lesson transitions. Thus, teachers are grad- with a civic organization. Many people consider the 
ually becoming aware of the research on effective teaching profession to be less than demanding, but 
teaching, and they are trying to incorporate the teachers actually work long hours, and they some- 
results into their own practice. times face additional stress due to the pressure to 

excel. The nature of the demands depends on where 
Expertise 

one teaches and on the interactions with students, 
David Berliner theorized that teachers progress parents, administrators, and other teachers. 
through a series of stages as they gain expertise as Some school settings are much more desirable 
educators (1988). Some teachers progress through than others. Teachers are subject to varying degrees 
these stages with little difficulty, whereas others of stress and burnout, and they need to be resilient 
may never progress to the expert stage. Although (Richards et al., 2016; Richards et al., 2014). Burn- 
experience can enhance teacher effectiveness, it out negatively affects performance; it can be man- 
does not guarantee that a teacher will acquire ifested in emotional exhaustion, reduced personal 
expertise (Dodds, 1994; Graber, 2001). By analogy, accomplishment, and a sense of depersonalization, 
Michael Phelps, Simone Biles, Tom Brady, and wherein the teacher feels disconnected from col- 
Serena Williams have high levels of performance leagues (Maslach & Jackson, 1986). 
expertise in their respective sports of swimming, In contrast, resilient teachers are better able to 
gymnastics, American football, and tennis. Other resist burnout and persist through stressful events 
athletes, however, may practice hard for many years while continuing to deliver effective instruction 
yet never achieve the same level of expertise. (Gloria et al., 2013). In fact, teachers with high 

Physical education teachers who are highly levels of resilience can cope even under stressful 
skilled in certain activities may have acquired con- working conditions. They are more likely to enjoy 
tent area expertise. That alone, however, does not their jobs and remain in the teaching profession 
guarantee teaching expertise. In addition to their for their entire working lives. 
content expertise, they must be able to convey 
content to their students through appropriate 

pedagogy before they can be considered to have KeEY. PON ee 
acquired teaching expertise. Both teaching and coaching are satisfying career 

Unfortunately, some teachers become bored or choices. Those who choose to engage in both simul- 
burned out with teaching and lose interest in learning 

taneously must be careful to fulfill the obligations of 
about ways to improve their teaching or to influence 

each role. 
student learning. They no longer learn from experi- 

ence, nor are they interested in reading professional 



Me 346 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Another role that many physical education observations of former teachers and coaches and 

teachers assume is that of coach for one or more reflect on each role, you may see how successfully 

sport teams at the school. Many physical education performing them both can be difficult for some 

teachers competed in sports themselves before people. Many people favor one role over the other, 

they became teachers, and some choose to teach and this can lead to a phenomenon called role with- 

specifically because of their strong desire to coach. drawal or retreatism. When this happens, one role 
Researchers have studied the dual roles of teaching suffers, and the clients (in this case, either students 

and coaching over the last decade, and they have or student-athletes) likely suffer the consequences 

found that for some teacher-coaches, a conflict of a less-than-satisfactory experience. 
arises in trying to perform both roles (Konukman You will occupy many roles in your life, both 
et al., 2010). Specifically, the research has focused personal and professional. As you prepare for them 
on how one can be an effective teacher of physical and take them on, think about your ability to per- 
education while also striving for success as a coach. form them concurrently and about the implications 

Role conflict occurs when a person takes on two for your own success and that of others. If, as a 
or more roles that are difficult, if not impossible, to teacher-coach, you put as much time into plan- 
perform simultaneously. If we examine the many ning good lessons for your teaching as you do in 
characteristics linked to teaching and coaching, planning good practice sessions for your athletes, 
we can see both compatibility and incompatibil- then you will have a good chance of succeeding 
ity between the two roles. If you recall your own in both roles. 

Professional Issues in Kinesiology 

Equality in U.S. Public Education 
Schools and classrooms are diverse settings. Regardless of gender, race, age, social class, 
sexual orientation, ability, or any other demographic characteristic, each student has the right to 
an education free of bias and discrimination. 

In 1972, Title IX was legislated by the United States Congress. It mandates that girls and 
women have the same educational opportunities as boys and men. Specifically, it states in part, 
“No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be 
denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any educational program or activity 
receiving Federal financial assistance....” 

Despite measures such as Title IX, some students continue to be disadvantaged for reasons 
beyond their control. In physical education settings, common forms of discrimination include bias 
against students who have less ability or are considered obese. In elimination games, for exam- 
ple, students with the lowest levels of skill are usually the first to be eliminated, although they 
are the ones most in need of practice. There has been considerable research on issues of equity 
and inclusiveness in physical education, and we encourage you to read the following landmark 
publications: 

Citation style: APA 
Davis, K. (2003). Teaching for gender equity in physical education: A review of the literature. Women in Sport 
and Physical Activity Journal, 12(2), 55-82. 

Griffin, PS. (1984). Girls’ participation patterns in a middle school team sports unit. Journal of Teaching in 
Physical Education, 4, 30-38. 

Griffin, PS. (1985). Teachers’ perceptions of and responses to sex equity problems in a middle school physical 
education program. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 56, 103-110. 

Hylton, K. (2015). ‘Race’ talk! Tensions and contradictions in sport and PE. Physical Education and Sport 
Pedagogy, 20(5), 503-516. 

Staurowsky, E., Hogshed-Makar, N., Kane, M., Wughalter, E., Yiamouyiannis, A., & Lerner, P (2007). Gender 
equity in physical education and athletics. In S. Klein (Ed.), Handbook for achieving sex equity through 
education. (pp. 381-410). Routledge. 



Chapter 13| Careers in Teaching Physical Education 347 

Licensure and Continuing Education If a teacher education program fails to meet estab- 

The majority of students lished state standards, it is placed on probation and 
admitted to a kinesiology 

or physical educatio may lose its ability to provide teacher licensure. 
n teacher education program 

intend to teach in a K- After a student meets all program and state test- 
12 school. Others may wish 

to become r ing requirements, he or she may apply for teacher 
ecreation specialists, fitness trainers, 

coaches, or ou licensure (sometimes referred to as certification). 
tdoor education experts. Regardless 

of their caree In many cases, reciprocity between states enables 
r path, students must meet many pro- 

gram requi a graduate from a program in one state to teach 
rements before gaining formal admis- 

sion to a in one or more other states throughout the United 
 teacher education program and before 

States. Some states require teachers to complete 
achieving licensure. These requirements typically 

continuing education courses periodically in order 
involve the following: 

to maintain a teaching license. This requirement 
>» Grades or grade point average: In most helps ensure that teachers remain current and 

teacher education programs, students must main- knowledgeable about the most effective teaching 
tain a certain minimum grade point average. In practices. For example, teachers may be required 
fact, most programs require a designated minimum to take 12 credits of continuing education courses 
grade point average just for admission into the pro- every 4 years in order to remain certified. They can 
gram. In addition, students must often maintain a usually meet this requirement by taking courses 
grade of B or higher in their professional education online or in person at a college or university, 
courses in order to continue in the program and enrolling in a master’s degree program, or attend- 
graduate with an emphasis in teacher education. ing approved professional conferences. However, 

>» Core Academic Skills for Educators requirements can vary considerably from state to 
(CORE) test: Before admission into certain courses state. 

(e.g., methods courses) or a particular phase in With regard to coaching, some schools mandate 
a program, students are sometimes required to that coaches be certified teachers, others require 
complete the CORE test. It contains multiple-choice only an undergraduate degree in any subject, and 
questions related to reading, writing, and math, the rest expect coaches to have specialized training 
along with two essay questions (Degreequery, or an endorsement from a group such as Human 
2020). Students must achieve minimum scores in Kinetics Coach Education Center. Similarly, fitness 
each area in order to progress in the program. professionals are often expected to become cer- 

>» Praxis II: Prior to teacher licensure in tified as personal trainers. Some students enter 

some states, students must pass the Praxis II. This colleges and universities for their training, whereas 

exam evaluates specialty content knowledge and others obtain certification through online courses. 

pedagogical knowledge. It is administered by 
the Educational Testing Service. In other states, 

KEE ON ee 
students complete tests that evaluate content and 
pedagogical knowledge using similar tests that Teaching and learning journals provide knowledge 

have different names (e.g., Assessment of Profes- about advances in the field, innovative teaching strat- 

sional Teaching). egies, and research results. To remain current, teachers 

>» edTPA: This test is a precursor to licensure should subscribe to and read as many journals as 

and is required in some form in 41 states. Teacher time permits. 
candidates pay approximately $300, and they are 
required to complete a variety of assessments 

In the United States, the easiest way to remain 
and provide evidence of their teaching ability by 

current and informed is to join the Society of Health 
submitting short video clips that are evaluated by 

and Physical Educators (SHAPE America). The 
trained scorers (edTPA, 2020). 

group’s website allows you to access information 
Although licensure requirements vary from 

about research, conferences, grants, professional 
state to state and country to country, they usually 

standards, and effective teaching practices. In 
involve a series of exams. In addition, the program 

exchange for your annual dues, you will receive 
in which you are enrolled is responsible for ensur- 

a monthly subscription to the Journal of Physical 
ing that you have developed adequate knowledge 

Education, Recreation and Dance and will be able 
and certain competencies. The curriculum in such 

to attend the national convention at a reduced rate. 
programs is periodically evaluated by state officials. 

You will also be able to log on to a members-only 



Ba 348 Introduction to Kinesiology 

portion of the website, where you can access the settings, schools contain a host of contextual factors 

most recent and important updates in the field. The that one must understand and cope with in order to 

best professionals who are the most committed to be successful. These factors—social, psychological, 

effective teaching know that membership in this political, economic, and other organizational fac- 

organization is essential for remaining current in tors—may emerge in the work setting or physical 

the field and for contributing to its development education class. For example, it is critical for a 

in the United States. teacher to have the emotional and financial support 
In Canada, you can remain informed by join- of colleagues and administrators. 

ing Physical and Health Education Canada (PHE The workplace may also be affected by outside 
Canada). This association, represented in all prov- influences—for instance, issues related to family, 
inces, is committed to advancing the field of phys- population demographics, civil rights, health care, 
ical education. It offers the Physical and Health drugs and violence, educational reform and policy, 
Education Journal, which contains much useful and advances in information technology (Tyson, 
information for teachers. PHE Canada members 1996). The ways in which instructors cope with these 
and SHAPE America members often attend the contextual factors inevitably influence their success 
same national conferences. For more information, as instructors and, ultimately, the success of learners. 
log on to the PHE Canada website. Similar national 
professional organizations for physical educators 
are found in most countries. KeEY POINT ee 

Considering the cost of your undergraduate Many research findings are relevant to all instructors 
education, the annual fee for joining these asso- of physical activity, regardless of the setting in which 
ciations, especially at student member rates, they work. Some findings are positive, whereas others 
is a cost-effective means of remaining current. offer unflattering portraits of the school environment. 
Indeed, becoming a member is a responsibility 
that informed professionals take seriously. Other 
professional associations and journals are listed at 
the end of this chapter. Life and Work in the Physical 

Education Setting 
Settings for Teaching Teacher effectiveness and satisfaction are often 

linked to the characteristics of the work setting. 
Physical Education 

Thus, it is important to understand the nature of 

In an ideal world, we all would have been exposed a specific workplace. Researchers have illustrated 
to excellent physical education settings. These set- both the positive and the negative aspects of school 
tings typically have good facilities and outstanding physical education—in short, what life in the gym is 
teachers. They are a joy to experience, and they like for teachers and students. Research has shown 
contribute to participants’ quality of life. In these that although elementary physical education is in 
settings, learning is fun, and participants come a relatively healthy state, secondary physical edu- 
away with an expanded set of physical skills. Teach- cation suffers from a variety of difficult social and 
ers who work in this type of setting are highly moti- political problems (Graber et al., 2008; McKenzie 

vated and thrive in a workplace that promotes their & Lounsbery, 2009). 
effectiveness. In short, these settings are character- Some scholars have also vividly depicted the mal- 
ized by the factors that promote high-quality work aise that existed in secondary physical education in 
life: respect from students, teacher participation in the United States in the mid-1980s. Cases of struggle 
decision making, collegial support and stimulation, appeared to be more commonplace than profiles of 
a sense of efficacy among teachers, resources that excellence. The obstacles to excellence at that time 
enable effective performance, and a common vision were summarized as follows by Griffin (1986): 
throughout the school (Stroot, 1996). 

° Lack of teacher or program evaluation 
The quality of the instructional environment in 

a school often determines the success and satis- e Lack of formal incentives or rewards for 

faction of both teachers and students. Therefore, good teaching 

it is critical for a teacher of physical education to ° Lack of professional support for teacher and 
understand the influence of the workplace and the program development activities 
cultural context in which he or she is employed * Inadequate facilities, equipment, and sched- 
(Flory & McCaughtry, 2011). Like other workplace uling 



Chapter 13| Careers in Teaching Physical Education 

The quality of the teaching environment affects teachers’ enjoyment of their jobs. 

© Human Kinetics 

¢ Failure to include teachers in decision part of the school curriculum by stakeholders, but 
making even in this highly acclaimed program, physical 

¢ Higher value placed on compliance and education teachers sometimes struggled with mar- 

smooth operations than on teaching com- ginalization (McLoughlin et al., 2020). 

petence 

¢ Acceptance of mediocrity 2eKEY PON e 
¢ [Isolation Research on school physical education has revealed 

In discussing these obstacles, Griffin stated, “In both positive and negative dimensions of the school 
most cases, the schools did not intentionally limit environment. 
what could be accomplished. . . . Instead, they prac- 
ticed benign neglect. The tendency of everyone to 
ignore physical education presented what seems to Influences on life and work in the physical 

have been the most formidable obstacle to excel- education setting include political, organizational, 

lence” (p. 58). In essence, physical education as a personal, and social factors. For example, a school’s 

subject area at the secondary level seems to have economic conditions often influence what facili- 

been perceived as superfluous to student learning; ties and equipment are available to teachers and 

accordingly, the physical education teacher held students. Some schools can offer a wide variety of 

an occupational status that has been described as curricular opportunities for students, whereas other 
schools are more limited. Figure 13.1 illustrates 

marginal. 
As society has increasingly grown to appreciate the factors most likely to influence workplace 

the importance of physical education in promoting conditions. 

public health, physical education in some schools is In the school context, teachers’ success and satis- 

increasingly being regarded as a critical subject. In faction are linked to many variables. Class size, for 

a recent study of one school that is nationally rec- example, can influence what material a teacher is 

ognized for health and physical activity promotion, able to cover, the amount of feedback that teachers 

physical education was considered an important can give to individual students, and the degree to 



WG 350 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Role and role expectations 
Work assignments 
Professional development 
Relationships with others 

Social climate 
Curriculum Support 
Goals Internal colleagues 
Schedules Political, economic, — External agents 
Staffing organizational, and Money 
Local, state, and }. personal-social factors Equipment 

federal policy \= influencing the workplace Facilities 
Content Rewards 

Subject matter and 
individual status-autonomy Colleagueship vs. isolation 

GeUaFERY Workplace conditions influencing the teacher. 

which students have sufficient opportunities to parental and community engagement in order to 
practice. In addition, school policy may dictate foster opportunities for students to participate in at 
how often students receive instruction or how they least 60 minutes of moderate to vigorous physical 
will be graded. Thus, the setting in which a teacher activity during the school day (Society of Health 
works can affect his or her career satisfaction and and Physical Educators, n.d.). 
ability to teach effectively. The CSPAP model is occasionally criticized 

because some believe that its strong focus on phys- 

Expanding Physical Education ical activity comes at the expense of motor skill 
development during physical education. However, 

There is reason for optimism about improving many scholars believe that a strong CSPAP pro- 
the work and learning environment for teachers gram can achieve both goals. That is, students can 
and students in physical education. This hope still acquire important motor skills while they are 
stems in part from legislative acts such as Public engaged in moderate to vigorous physical activity 
Law 108-265, which requires every school in the for the majority of the physical education period 
United States that participates in the National 

(Graber et al., 2020). 
School Lunch Program to implement a schoolwide 
plan addressing physical activity and nutrition. In 
fact, because of physical education’s importance Physical Education 
to public health, teachers have never been better and the Public Health Agenda 
positioned to help lead school initiatives to improve For nearly four decades, the question of physical 
students’ health, wellness, and fitness (Graber & 

education’s role in the public health agenda has 
Woods, 2007; Woods & Graber, 2007). Formerly 

been addressed by various scholars (Hills et al., 
marginalized physical education teachers are now 

2015; Pate et al., 2011; McKenzie & Lounsbery, 
being encouraged to assume roles such as school 

2013; O’Sullivan, 2004; Sallis & McKenzie, 1991; 
physical activity director (Castelli & Beighle, 2007). 

Sallis et al., 2012) and has received attention in 
One of the most promising new models is the 

major national reports (Institute of Medicine, 2013; 
comprehensive school physical activity program 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and 
(CSPAP), which has the potential to change how 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2016). 
physical education is valued in school communities. 

At the same time, the role of physical activity has 
The model uses a multidimensional approach to 

been a major priority for the Centers for Disease 
engage students in physical activity by encouraging 

Control and Prevention (2020). These scholars and 
them to participate in physical education, in before- 

agencies have studied the influence of physical edu- 
and after-school programs, and in other physical 

cation and physical activity on conditions such as 
activity programs offered at school. It partners 

obesity, diabetes, heart disease, cancer, depression, 
physical education teachers with other members and many other diseases across the life span, but 
of the school community (e.g., classroom teachers, with a particular emphasis on children enrolled in 
principals, local professionals) and encourages 

K-12 public education. 



Chapter 13| Careers in Teaching Physical Education 351 

The findings in the literature have been mixed, providing students with at least 60 minutes of daily 
They range from studies indicating that physical moderate to vigorous physical activity to desig- 
education has had a significant influence on the nating physical education as a core subject. The 
health of youth to studies suggesting that the recommendations also suggest that teacher educa- 
influence of physical education has been modest tion programs should provide training that enables 
to insignificant at best. The key in each case was teachers to promote physical activity throughout 
the level of significance and support for physical the school curriculum, and that all students should 
education in a given school district. Those districts have equal access to physical activity opportunities 
that see physical education as a key subject in the in K-12 schools. 
growth and development of children and make If we follow the recommendations of scholars 
significant investments in physical education see and the Institute of Medicine, physical education 
positive returns on their investment (McLoughlin can play an important role in fostering public 
& Graber, 2020). In contrast, it makes sense that health across the life span. Through the promo- 
those districts that marginalize the subject do not tion of active lifestyles, those entering a career in 
contribute to promoting a public health agenda physical education can serve as positive agents in 
centered on the well-being of children. There is no addressing public health. 
question that when the CSPAP model (Carson & 
Webster, 2020) or the Health Optimizing Physical 
Education (HOPE) model (Metzler et al., 2013a) Roles for Physical Education 
are given high priority and proper implementation Professionals 
in the school curriculum, physical education can 
affect the health of our students during their public As physical educators become increasingly active 

school years and well into their adult years. in addressing public health problems such as the 

Perhaps the most significant report that teachers, obesity epidemic—and as greater emphasis is 

administrators, parents, and policy makers should placed on physical activity across the curriculum— 

use as a framework for the role of physical educa- they may become less marginalized. In fact, they 

tion in public health comes from the Institute of may come to be perceived as leaders in promoting 

Medicine (2013). This report has six recommen- physical activity and health through high-quality 

dations that guide a positive public health agenda school programs (Graber & Woods, 2007; Woods 

for our future. The recommendations range from & Graber, 2007). Of course, program improvement 

Hot Career Opportunity 
Leadership in Physical Activity in Education 

As the number of schools offering comprehensive school physical activity increases, there is a 
need to hire teachers who are school leaders at promoting physical activity opportunities for stu- 
dents across the curriculum. These teachers may teach both physical and health education, and 
they may also direct before- and after-school physical activity and fitness programs for students 
and members of the community. They may work with classroom teachers to help them incorporate 

physical activity into their classes, and they may help physical education teachers in the district 

learn how to incorporate higher levels of moderate to vigorous physical activity into the curriculum. 

They may even lead the school health club. 
One teacher education program that has gained attention for its efforts to offer undergraduate 

students degree options that lead to hot career opportunities is that of the Pennsylvania State 

University. Faculty have designed an Applied Exercise and Health dual-pathway program that 

replaces the more traditional physical education teacher licensure program. In this hybrid program, 

undergraduate students can obtain certification in health and physical education, with the option of 

also obtaining fitness certification. Or they can take courses that can lead to certification through 

organizations like the American College of Sports Medicine and the National Strength and Con- 

ditioning Association (Parkes & Weimer, 2020). Programs like this provide students with options 

that lead to many exciting career opportunities in K-12 schools or in business and industry. 



MG 352 Introduction to Kinesiology 

is not easy, and it must be led by dedicated people ¢ Partner with others, both inside and outside 
who can negotiate a variety of obstacles and use of the school community, to foster additional 
effective strategies for promoting physical activity physical activity opportunities for children 
among youth (Lau et al., 2016). Physical education throughout the school day. 
teachers who succeed with CSPAP are likely to do 

In addition, successful teachers are likely to have 
the following: 

support in the following forms: 
* Use innovative instructional strategies. 

* High-profile public relations programs 
° Develop novel curriculums. 

¢ Supportive colleagues and administrators 
* Integrate physical education with other 

¢ Adequate funding 
subject matter. 

* Administrators who promote equitable 
* Develop unique ways to promote learning 

learning settings 
progressions. 

* Use exemplary classroom management These teachers demonstrate a sincere interest 

strategies. in and enthusiasm for teaching, a genuine con- 
cern for students, and a continued desire to grow 

* Become involved in professional develop- 
and develop as teachers. The settings in which 

ment activities. 
they work are not unlike other physical activity 

¢ Model athletic skill and fitness. settings (e.g., fitness clubs, private golf and tennis 
* Implement after-school programs for stu- clubs, recreation centers) in which a high priority 

dents and adults. is placed on customer service and on the welfare 
of participants. 

Physical education teachers help students learn movement skills, sport skills, and life span physical activities. 
© FatCamera/E+/Getty Images 



Chapter 13| Careers in Teaching Physical Education 

Typical Teaching Responsibilities teach longer units that introduce students to a variety 
of sports, games, and fitness and exploratory activ- 

Before becoming certified teachers, most future 
teachers spend many ities. Those at the high school level typically teach 

hours in schools participating 
the longest units as a means of helping students to 

in practicum and student teaching experiences, 
during which time they acquire enough skill to participate proficiently in a 

observe and assist expe- 
few activities throughout their lives. Teachers at all 

rienced teachers. Although no experience can 
levels may also be required to teach classes specif- 

completely prepare new teachers for all that they 
ically designed for children with special needs or 

will encounter once they enter the instructional 
to include them in their regular classes. Therefore, 

setting as certified teachers, practicum and student 
most teacher education programs offer courses that 

teaching experiences provide teachers in training 
provide future teachers with knowledge about such 

with good exposure to students that will ease the 
needs and about appropriate ways to structure the 

transition into the teaching role. 
curriculum to serve them. 

Teachers can expect to meet with students for 
Although teacher salaries are usually modest, 

about 180 days per school year. Although most 
the benefits are generally good, and the personal 

schools operate on a 9-month calendar, some 
rewards of teaching can be great. Witnessing the 

school districts convene throughout the year. In 
joy of a child who masters a new skill or seeing 

year-round schooling, students attend school for 
a previously inactive student become an active 

the same number of days as those who attend for 
participant offers satisfaction that is difficult to 

9 months, but their schedule includes breaks that 
find elsewhere. 

occur frequently throughout the year. 
Teachers at the elementary level generally teach 

8 to 10 classes per day in 30- to 45-minute periods. Rewards for Outstanding Teaching 
These teachers meet with students from one to Teachers who are hardworking and competent— 
five times per week and sometimes split their time particularly those who remain current in their 
between two schools. Teachers at the secondary field—may be recognized for their contributions to 
level teach fewer classes (five to seven) per day the profession at the local, state, or national level. 
but in longer (45- to 60-minute) class periods. For example, they may be recognized for being 
These teachers usually meet with students three to among the best in their profession by displaying 
five times per week at the same school. Whereas special characteristics linked to excellent teaching, 
physical education teachers at the elementary level outstanding curriculums, and the promotion of 
may be the only physical activity specialists at their student learning. You may have wondered who 
schools, those in secondary settings often have these people are. Where do they teach? How do 
several colleagues in physical education. they teach? What led to their development as great 

In the United States, it is recommended that teachers? We have all known great teachers in our 
elementary school students receive at least 150 own lives. Who are the outstanding teachers who 
minutes of weekly physical education and second- made a difference in your life? 
ary students at least 225 minutes of weekly phys- For every subject area, teachers across the United 
ical education for the entire school year (SHAPE States receive recognition on an annual basis for 
America & AHA, 2016). In most states, however, excellence in teaching. These teachers are selected 
students receive far less school-based physical edu- through various award programs. For example, 
cation instruction than these recommendations call one program has been offered since 1952 by the 
for. For example, the percentage of students who Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO). 
received physical education in the United States According to its nomination process, candidates 
declined from 42 percent to 28 percent between for this award should 
1991 and 2003. Fortunately, however, because of ¢ inspire students of all backgrounds and 
increased concern about children’s health, 44 states abilities to learn; 
have introduced laws since 2005 to improve or 

e be respected and admired by students, par- 
increase physical education (Cawley et al., 2006). 

ents, and colleagues; 
With regard to content, teachers at the elementary 

level tend to teach short units of instruction that ¢ play an active, useful role in the school and 

emphasize basic skill development and introduce in the community; and 

children to concepts such as speed, force, and ¢ be poised, be articulate, and possess the 

direction. Teachers at the middle school level tend to energy to withstand a taxing schedule. 



i 354 Introduction to Kinesiology 

In another example related more closely to our Conduct a quality and diverse physical 

discipline, SHAPE America conducts a teacher of education program that reflects appropriate 

the year (TOY) program. The first TOY award in standards of practice. 
this program went to Regina McGill of Bettendorf, Use various teaching methods and appro- 
Iowa. The selection process begins at the state level, priate learning experiences. 
and state winners are then considered for district Develop diverse curricular experiences that are 
(regional) honors. From there, a special panel of innovative and meet the needs of all students. 
judges considers district winners for the national 
awards, which are now presented at three levels: Utilize student assessments. 

elementary, middle, and high school, in addition Engage in professional development and 

to adapted physical education. TOY nominees are advocate for physical education. 

expected to meet the following criteria: Provide service to the profession through 
leadership, presentations, or advocacy. 

Kinesiology Colleagues 

Jennifer Mettler 
Each year, SHAPE America honors physical education and 
health teachers across the nation for exemplary performance. 
In 2019, the award for Middle School Teacher of the Year went 
to Jennifer Mettler from Alice C. Stelle Middle School in Calaba- 
sas, California. She received her undergraduate and master’s 
degrees in exercise physiology from California State Univer- 
sity, Chico, where she also received her teaching credential. 
She later became a National Board Certified Teacher. This is 
an additional certification program for highly accomplished 
teachers who meet the highest standards of the profession. 

Having experienced quality physical education as a child, 
she carries with her the desire to inspire others to be life- 
long learners and movers. Being intentional, relevant, and 
connected are the three principles that guide her teaching. 
Jennifer is intentional about every decision in her physical 
education class. Following a standards-based approach when 
designing her curriculum, she asks, “What should my stu- 

© Jennifer Mettler 
dents know and be able to do?” “Why is this relevant to the 
learner?” and “How will | know they are successful?” Creating 

relevant and intentional learning experiences with clear expectations for success motivates her 
students to challenge themselves. 

The importance of connection in the classroom cannot be understated. Creating a safe space 
for students built upon trust, mutual respect, and genuine care for all students is the foundation for 
learning in her class. Taking the time to recognize students for their many different qualities in her 
Student of the Week program conveys to the class that everyone has something special about them. 

She considers herself a lifelong learner and attends conferences across the country. Advocating 
for quality physical education and wellness in schools is an ongoing passion for Jennifer. Too often 
physical education and wellness programs are undervalued or poorly implemented in education. 
Because of this, she has traveled to Capitol Hill to meet with legislators, facilitated standards-based 
lesson design workshops for physical education teachers, brought presentations to classroom teach- 
ers on how to incorporate movement into the classroom, engaged her staff in wellness challenges, 
created advocacy letters for physical education, helped her school qualify for a National Healthy School 
award, presented across the nation, and developed a physical wellness committee in her district. 



Chapter 13| Careers in Teaching Physical Education 

In a study of four teachers who received pres- options are available (Graber et al., 2011). Most 
tigious teaching awards from the state of Georgia, teachers, particularly at the high school level, also 
DeMarco (1999) discovered that these teachers choose to coach. Some pursue graduate education 
maximized student engagement in motor tasks and and obtain a master’s degree, which enables one to 
managed the physical education class with great be an instructor at a college or university; others 
effectiveness (i.e., students were not disruptive). obtain a doctorate degree so that they can teach 
DeMarco found that all four teachers held a strong and conduct research in a higher education setting. 
belief in the value of their work and in their abil- Some elect to work in a fitness facility or commu- 
ity to do that work. They also loved students and nity recreation center. Others may simply decide to 
enjoyed teaching. Furthermore, they were greatly volunteer their time as a youth sport coach. 
admired by students, fellow teachers, administra- 
tors, and parents. Finally, all four teachers were Teaching Physical Education in a School 
active in professional organizations, including local 
teaching organizations and the state and national Most licensed teachers work in a public or private 

levels of SHAPE America. school at the elementary, middle, or high school 

Most students who major in physical education level. To help university professors design an 

decide to teach in the public schools, but other undergraduate curriculum that adequately prepares 

SHAPE America National Standards for Initial Physical Education Teacher Education 

Standard 1: Content and Foundational Knowledge 
Physical education teacher candidates demonstrate an understanding of common and specialized con- 
tent, and scientific and theoretic foundations for the delivery of an effective physical education program. 

Standard 2: Skillfulness and Health-Related Fitness 

Physical education teacher candidates are physically literate individuals who can demonstrate 
skillful performance in physical education content areas and health-enhancing levels of fitness. 

Standard 3: Planning and Implementation 
Physical education candidates apply content and foundational knowledge to plan and implement 
developmentally appropriate learning experiences aligned with local, state and/or SHAPE America’s 
National Standards and Grade-Level Outcomes for K-12 Physical Education through the effective 
use of resources, accommodations and/or modifications, technology and eee strategies 
to address the diverse needs of all students. 

Standard 4: Instructional Delivery and Management 
Physical education candidates engage students in meaningful learning experiences through effec- 
tive use of pedagogical skills. They use communication, feedback, technology, and instructional 
and managerial skills to enhance student learning. 

Standard 5: Assessment of Student Learning 

Physical education candidates select and implement appropriate assessments to monitor students’ 

progress and guide decision making related to instruction and learning. 

Standard 6: Professional Responsibility 

Physical education teacher candidates demonstrate behaviors essential to becoming effective 

professionals. They exhibit professional ethics and culturally competent practices; seek opportuni- 

ties for continued professional development; and demonstrate knowledge of promotion/advocacy 

strategies for physical education and expanded physical activity opportunities that support the 

development of physically literate individuals. 

Copyright 2017, SHAPE America — Society of Health and Physical Educators, 1900 Association Drive, Reston, VA 20191, www.shapeamerica.org. 

All rights reserved. Used with permission. 



BE 356 Introduction to Kinesiology 

future teachers to teach at these different grade are often considered desirable. Most professors of 

levels, SHAPE America (2017) has developed a set pedagogy have also worked at one point or another 

of national standards that most U.S. teacher edu- as public school teachers. Many choose to work at 

cation programs strive to achieve (see the sidebar the college or university level because they want to 
listing the SHAPE America national standards). improve teacher education. An increasing number 

These standards relate to the knowledge and skills of professors also want to engage in research and 
that you will be expected to apply as a teacher of mentor graduate students. They design studies 

physical education. intended to help us better understand the work of 
teaching and how to promote instruction that leads 

Teaching in Higher Education Settings to meaningful student learning. Professors also 
present papers at professional conferences, par- 

Some people choose to teach at a college or uni- ticipate on national committees, collaborate with 
versity. If you obtain a master’s degree, you are teachers in the public schools, remain informed 
qualified to work as a college-level instructor, in about state licensure requirements, and serve on 
which position you might be responsible for teach- departmental and other committees. 
ing skills courses (e.g., basketball, aquatics, racket 
sports) or supervising student teachers. Although 
some people elect to remain employed as instruc- SO 
tors throughout their careers, others view this 

If you decide to become a professor of physical edu- 
option as too limited because, without a doctorate, 

cation pedagogy, you should acquire public school 
they cannot teach or advise graduate students, and 
they may be unable serve on important committees. teaching experience. This background strengthens your 

By obtaining a doctoral degree, which is the credibility in the eyes of both your students and K-12 

precursor to the professorial ranks, people gain physical education teachers. 

access to additional career responsibilities that 

7 Kinesiology Colleagues 

Ben Kern 

Ben Kern initially decided to become a physical education 
teacher because it matched his interests in exercise science, 
teaching, and coaching. After teaching for 7 years in a high-pov- 
erty, rural public high school in southern Colorado, he realized 
that the work of physical educators involves much more than 
just exercise and sport; it is also a critical part of developing 
young peoples’ knowledge, skills, and attitudes for living an 
active and healthy life. Kern also served as director of strength 
and conditioning and as an adjunct instructor at Adams State 
University in Alamosa, Colorado, before being offered a unique 
opportunity—to help design and implement a program using 
evidence-based physical education to support children’s 
health in high-poverty areas. This work was part of a research 
initiative funded by the University of Colorado Denver, and 
his role was to Support physical education teachers as an 
instructional coach. 

The success of the program convinced Kern that he 
“College of Applied ‘Heal

th Sciences, University of 

tlinois at Urbana-Champaign. could help others achieve a healthier life through research, 
teaching, and service in kinesiology. Thus, he completed his 

PhD at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and is now an assistant professor at the 
University of Wyoming. There he continues to conduct research and to teach others about ways 
to improve quality of life through physical education and school-based physical activity. 



Chapter 13| Careers in Teaching Physical Education 357 

Regardless of whether you elect to pursue grad- modified so that all students can participate. In the 
uate study in physical education teacher education, United States, federal Public Laws 94-142, 101-476, 
you should obtain public school teaching experi- and 105-17 stipulate that students with disabil- 
ence. Would an instructor or professor in a university ity will be provided with a program of physical 
teacher education program have greater credibility education that includes motor skills; fundamental 
in your eyes if he or she had several years of expe- skills such as running, catching, and throwing; 
rience as a teacher? In most cases, your answer will and skills in games, sports, and aquatics. These 
be yes. Public school experience can also open the laws cover a large range of disabilities, including 
door to other intriguing career possibilities, such Down syndrome, hearing disorders, spina bifida, 
as recreation instructor, whitewater rafting guide, muscular dystrophy, and a host of others. If a 
or other areas involving physical activity. In many child has unusual restrictions, the instruction must 
cases, it is a requirement if you wish to be hired at be provided through an individualized program 
the college or university level as a teacher educator. developed by the child’s teacher, parents, and other 

interested parties. Where the disability permits, 

Adapted Physical Education children must be mainstreamed into the regular 
classroom or gymnasium as a way of meeting 

Adapted physical education consists of a program 
Public Law 94-142, which means that physical 

of skill instruction and exercise that has been 
education teachers must be prepared to teach a 

Case Study in Adapted Instruction 

Town Middle School had a great adapted physical education program that helped students with 
disability to stay active. The teacher responsible for the program was Ms. Kelly, and students with 
disability were uniformly placed in her adapted physical education class. In contrast, students 
with disability were never placed in the other physical education class, which was taught by Coach 
Stevens. 

Then, one day when Coach Stevens was taking attendance, he called the name “Joe Henninger,” 
only to have no one respond. He assumed that the student was absent that day, until a few other 
students explained to him that Joe was hearing impaired. At first, Coach Stevens thought it was 
a student prank, but he soon discovered that the students were telling the truth and that Joe 
had been mainstreamed into his class. He then watched as a student walked up to him while 
speaking and signing at the same time. With a worried look on his face, Coach Stevens thanked 
Joe for introducing himself. 

During the class activity, which was knockout basketball, Joe played the game well and even 
won a few times. Coach Stevens was surprised that Joe was athletic and exhibited great skills. 
However, these factors did not change Coach Stevens’ mind about asking the principal, Mr. Hicks, 
to place Joe in Ms. Kelly’s care in the adapted physical education class. After a meeting between 
Mr. Hicks, Coach Stevens, and Ms. Kelly, Mr. Hicks agreed to move Joe back into the adapted 
class. Joe was extremely disappointed and appealed to his parents to change the situation. He 
felt that his rights were being violated. 

Your Decision 

Do you think Coach Stevens’ reaction to Joe was fair? Based on your experience with students 

with disability, how likely is it that other experienced teachers would respond in a similar way? 

How might Ms. Kelly (or you) advocate for Joe to remain in Coach Stevens’ class? What role does 

federal law have in the local school district’s decision about Joe’s placement? 

Resolution 

In a meeting involving Joe’s parents, their attorney, Mr. Hicks, Coach Stevens, Ms. Kelly, and the 

school district’s attorney, the parties concluded that, under federal Public Law 94-142, Joe was 

entitled to be placed in Coach Stevens’ class and that Coach Stevens should make every effort 

to accommodate Joe in promoting a meaningful learning environment. 



Ea 358 introduction to Kinesiology 

curriculum to children with a diverse range of Beyond the public schools, specialized schools 

abilities. In larger school districts, students with usually hire a staff of adapted physical education 

similar disabilities may be grouped for physical teachers to work with their chosen populations, 

education instruction. such as children with intellectual disability, a severe 

One cannot presume to teach students who have orthopedic disorder, or limited or no capacity for 
serious disabilities without understanding some- seeing or hearing. If working with children and 
thing about disability and how it can affect a child’s adults who have been challenged by disease or 
performance. To meet this need, some colleges and injury is a career possibility that excites you, give 
universities offer certification or endorsement in some thought to obtaining a master’s degree in 
physical education special education; these pro- adapted physical education; this background will 
grams are often modeled on the Adapted Physical prepare you for the challenges of such a career. 
Education National Standards (APENS) and the Cer- 
tified Adapted Physical Educators (CAPE) national Coaching 
certification. Your state probably requires at least 

Many people who enter teaching do so because 
one course in adapted physical education as part 

they want a career in coaching. That is, they are 
of your teacher licensure program; you might also 

less interested in teaching and more interested in 
consider specializing in this exciting area. 

Case Study in Coaching 

Before the season started, rumors started filling the hallways of Eden High School. The students 
were talking about “hazing.” Overhearing them, Bonnie, a physical education teacher at the school, 
briefly wondered whether the buzz was about a recent incident at a nearby school, which had been 
in the news, or was just gossip. Her attention quickly moved to other subjects, however, because 
she had never seen a problem with hazing at Eden High. She definitely didn’t think it was a problem 
in her classes or with her girls’ basketball team. 

Soon, however, Bonnie learned that the problem was, in fact, happening at Eden. To her dismay, 
she learned that hazing was an annual ritual of the boys’ basketball team—and one that was 
known by the team’s head coach. In the ritual, the team’s seniors made the first-year members 
(some of whom were in her physical education class) sneak out of their homes at midnight and 
meet in a secluded area behind the local mall in subfreezing weather. Forced to strip down to only 
their underwear, these boys were subjected to an hour of strenuous physical exercises. Afterward, 
the first-years were sworn to secrecy about the “private meeting” and told to go home. This time, 
however, one of them had “blown the whistle” after becoming very ill and having to go to the 
emergency room. 

Your Decision 

What is the responsibility of the head coach of the boys’ team in this situation? What is the role 
of the school principal and athletic director? Should rituals be accepted in interscholastic sports? 
If so, what types of rituals? What do you think should happen to the seniors at Eden? To the head 
coach? 

Resolution 

Separate meetings were called with the seniors and the first-years, as well as their parents. The 
meeting participants included school administrators, the athletic director, the boys’ basketball 
coach, and representatives of the school faculty. The situation was presented by the school 
principal, testimony was obtained from all parties, and the school hazing policy was reviewed. 
Subsequently, the evidence was evaluated by a school panel established to rule on the case. The 
panel ruled that the seniors should be suspended from school for a week and dismissed from 
the team. The coach was permanently dismissed from the coaching role and placed on probation 
for the remainder of the year as a teacher. 



Chapter 13| Careers in Teaching Physical Education 

coaching. Although a career in teaching physical people obtain assistant or head coaching positions 
education offers entry into coaching, a teach- in higher education. At the most competitive level, 
er-coach can become less committed to teaching NCAA Division I, these people only coach, and their 
than to coaching (see the earlier discussion of career advancement is contingent on winning. As a 
teacher—coach role conflict). In such cases, students result, they face enormous pressure to recruit and 
who are in the classes of these teacher-coaches produce winning teams. For more information on 
often suffer. coaching at a competitive level, see chapter 14. 

Of course, many teacher-coaches do an outstand- 
ing job of balancing the workload of teaching and 
coaching. These individuals believe that physical Trends and Opportunities 
education is critical because it offers an opportunity in Teaching Physical Education 
for students to acquire skills regardless of ability. 
They carefully plan lessons that promote skill If you intend to become a teacher of physical 

development in all students. These teacher-coaches education, your prospects for finding employment 

also believe that athletics are important because are high. In many states, schools have a desperate 

they offer students an opportunity for advanced need for physical education teachers. In Illinois, for 

competition. Therefore, they carefully manage their example, students at all grade levels are required 

time to enable success in both roles. to take physical education daily; as a result, severe 

Coaching is not an easy job, and coaches may teacher shortages exist in many areas of the state. 

confront situations that are challenging and unex- In some states, the need for teachers is so severe 

pected. Those who elect to coach spend many that undergraduate students can apply for a loan 

hours at their schools each day. They often arrive that will be forgiven if they agree to teach in that 

earlier than other teachers in order to plan classes state for a certain length of time after they become 

and practices. Although some coaches receive an certified. Rapidly growing states and counties also 

extra release period during the day for planning have a tremendous need for good physical educa- 

purposes, many spend their evenings and week- tion teachers. If you are willing to move to a part of 

ends planning practices and scheduling compet- the country that needs physical education teachers, 

itive events. Immediately before or after school, you are likely to find employment quickly. 

they spend several hours practicing with students, You can improve your employability by ensur- 

engaging them in drills and fitness activities that ing that you acquire as many skills as possible 

will enable them to compete successfully against while enrolled in a teacher education program as 

other students. Some coaches handle only one an undergraduate. You may know that physical 

sport during the year, whereas others elect to coach education teachers who are also good coaches 

year-round and even during the summer months. are always in demand, but you may not know that 

Some become so engaged in the coaching role that physical education teachers often find employment 

they offer summer clinics or camps for students. because they also have the following qualifications 

Although most physical education teachers (some of which will require additional education 

choose to coach in the public schools, some prefer and licensure): 

coaching at a college or university. Most begin their * Certification as an athletic trainer 
careers as graduate teaching assistants enrolled 

e Licensure to teach health education Gincreas- 
in master’s degree programs. As they gain experi- 

ingly needed for positions in secondary 
ence and acquire name recognition, a few of these 

schools) 

Selecting a Career 

List the advantages and disadvantages of each of the following career options. 

> Teaching physical education in a public school 

> Teaching in a higher education setting 

>» Teaching adapted physical education 

» Coaching in a public school 

> Coaching at the college level (e.g., Division | school) 



a 360 Introduction to Kinesiology 

¢ Ability to speak a second language fluently example, have you ever observed soccer coaches 

who allow players to stand in long lines waiting 
¢ Endorsement to teach in additional high-de- 

for a turn while one player at a time kicks the 
mand subject areas 

ball? This problem would not occur in a program 
e Licensure to teach driver’s education run by someone who was educated in an effective 

Schools that do not currently offer physical edu- teacher education program, regardless of whether 

cation are likely to add it as a required curricular that person ever taught in a K-12 school. Those 
area in the future. This is because physical edu- who have been trained in pedagogy understand 

cation can contribute to the public health agenda. that students cannot learn without practice oppor- 

For some students, school is the only place where tunities and that standing in a long line does not 
they have an opportunity to be active. As more facilitate student learning. 
schools add physical education or increase the 
time devoted to the subject, the need for teachers 
will increase. Thus, there has never been a better Advice for Physical Education 
time to enter the profession. Students 

For those who wish to teach or coach outside of 
the K-12 setting, the education they receive while When effective teachers are asked to describe the 

enrolled in a teacher education program will place point at which they really learned how to teach, 

them in good standing for whatever teaching-re- their response is that they have never stopped 

lated position they may eventually pursue. For learning to teach. That is, they view learning to 

Kinesiology Colleagues 

Donn Tobin 
In 2019, the award for SHAPE America Elementary Teacher of 
the Year went to Donn Tobin of Yorktown Heights, New York. A 
graduate of the State University of New York at Cortland and 
a teacher for 23 years, he prides himself on connecting with 
the younger students and looks to create an environment of 
excitement for them. 

Tobin believes that student choice and the ability to build 
upon previous skills can help enable all students to retain and 
grow in their skills. Tobin uses a spiral-themed approach to 
curriculum. This model breaks traditional 2- to 3-week units of 
instruction into smaller 1-week “chunks,” which are revisited 
several times over the next couple of seasons. This innova- 
tive approach allows for building more complexity and allows 
for different types of assessment. Children in turn become 
more confident with their skills, beliefs, and attitudes toward 
physical activity. 

Tobin chooses not to become complacent with his teach- 
© Donn Tobin. 

ing and professional development. He frequently attends 
conferences, seminars, and workshops that will improve his 

teaching. He recognizes that veteran teachers may become stuck in their ways, a sentiment 
that he tries to avoid. He believes that it is always possible to learn a new skill or technique that 
can be incorporated into his own teaching. 

Finally, Tobin agrees that the company you surround yourself with can make or break you as 
a professional. Similar to athletics, interacting with highly motivated professionals influences a 
growth mindset in teachers as well. Networking, communicating, and observing successful peers 
may be the secret to becoming a master teacher. 



Chapter 13| Careers in Teaching Physical Education 361 

teach as a lifelong process that continues well after small sample of the types of knowledge currently 
one becomes certified and leaves the influence of available to those who work in pedagogy. 
a teacher education program. In short, learning to We hope that you will aspire to be like one of 
teach is an ongoing process. Therefore, we encour- the SHAPE America Teachers of the Year—someone 
age you to engage in professional discourse with who is committed to student learning, engages in 
colleagues, attend professional conferences, and effective teaching practices, works toward develop- 
become familiar with knowledge generated by ing subject-matter expertise, and remains profes- 
research investigations. Just as you expect your sionally involved and current in the field. We also 
physician to remain current in the medical field, hope that you will receive the same satisfaction in 
parents and students will expect you to remain your career that has been experienced by the thou- 
current in yours. sands of teachers who enter the workplace every 

day with the belief that they can make a difference 
in the lives of children. 

Wrap-Up If you are considering embarking on a teaching 

This chapter introduces you to the knowledge base career, you will need to know much more about 

for the pedagogy of physical education. Exciting pedagogy than we can discuss here. You will find 

developments have occurred over the past two greater success if you consistently and objectively 

decades, and new knowledge will continue to reevaluate your current beliefs in light of new, 

emerge as researchers ask more sophisticated research-based knowledge about effective teaching. 

questions and develop new methods for collect- As a member of the next generation of teachers, 

ing data. The information presented here is but a you can make a difference. 

_MORE INFORMATION ON CAREERS IN PHYSICAL EDUCATION 

Organizations 

American Educational Research Association 

Association Internationale des Ecoles Supérieures d’Education Physique 

Federation Internationale D’education Physique 

National Association for Kinesiology and Physical Education in Higher Education 

Physical and Health Education Canada 

Society of Health and Physical Educators 

Research on Learning & Instruction in Physical Education: Special Interest Group of the 
American Educational Research Association 

Journals 

Action in Teacher Education 

American Educational Research Journal 

Educational Technology 

Elementary School Journal 

High School Journal 

International Journal of Physical Education 

Journal of Educational Research 

Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior 

Journal of Physical Education, Recreation and Dance 

Journal of Research and Development in Education 

Journal of School Health 



Be 362 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Journal of Teacher Education 

Journal of Teaching in Physical Education 

Kinesiology Review 

Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 

Physical Educator 

Physical and Health Education Journal 

Quest 

Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport 

Sport, Education and Society 

Strategies: A Journal for Physical and Sport Educators 

Teaching and Teacher Education 

SeREVIEW QUESTIONS e 
1. How do your experiences as a student of physical activity connect to the examples of 

effective and ineffective teaching discussed in this chapter? 

2. How can you develop expertise in one or more of the content areas of physical education? 

3. How might you convince others that physical education class does not detract from student 
learning in other academic subject matters? What would you say? 

4. Describe three ways in which a teacher you have observed could increase the amount of 
moderate to vigorous physical activity that students receive. 

5. To reduce management time, what routines are most important for students to learn? Which 
routines would you emphasize? Describe how you would implement those routines. 

6. Which curricular framework would you choose to implement as an instructor? Why? 

7. What characteristics should teachers display in order to receive a teaching award? 

8. How can you avoid the pitfalls of teacher—coach role conflict? 

9 . Describe your high school physical education program and how you would work to improve 
the quality of that program. 

as L-| KP rope |») Go to HKPropel to complete the activities for this chapter. 



Careers in Coaching 
and Sport Instruction 

Joseph A. Luxbacher and Duane V. Knudson 

In this chapter, we will 

e acquaint you with the wide range of proressional opportunities available 
in the sphere of coaching and sport instruction, ee 

e familiarize you with the work of, and qualifications for,c oaching and 
professional sport instruction, = 

e inform you about the Sdlicatonal requirements and life, e xperiences 
necessary to become a qualified and successful coach :o rspat 
instructor, and — oe : 

e help you determine whether «on e of tiece:p rofessions mn atchesy our 
skills, aptitudes, and professional Lee ao : 



ce Rob, a fener Division es occero ie he.e arned ag 
soccer at a nationally ranked university. His team had suffered throug 
and Rob knew that retaining his job could depend on qualifying for the NCAA t i 
counting on the team to make a strong run through the conference tournament and earn an auto 

matic bid to the NCAA tournament. Rob’s hopes were based in part on the alents of 

his star player, Javier, who led the conference in goals - 
scored, assists, and total points. The team won its 
first-round playoff match 2-1, with Javier scoring both — 

_ goals, then won its semifinal match to advance to the ~ 
conference championship. Javier also scored a goal in 
the semifinal but had to leave the game shortly after : 
‘halftime when he knocked heads with an Opponent 4 
while trying to head the ball. 

During a light training |s ession on the following day, 3 
Javier complained of a headache, upset stomach, and — 
dizziness. Rob realized that these symptoms could ; 
_ be indications of a concussion. As a coach, he had to ~ 
make a decision—inform the training staff of Javier's — 
o symptoms, which wou 1 probably keep him out of the 

information t 

© Human Kinetics 

Coaching can be a satisfying and enjoyable pro- students set their sights on a career as a coach or 
fession; it can also pose philosophical challenges as a sport instructor in a nonschool setting. Of 
and dilemmas. Coaches at the highest levels of course, physical education teachers in schools often 
competition are expected to compete for champion- take on coaching positions as additional duties, but 
ships, but the pursuit of that goal is often affected there are also increasing opportunities to coach in 
by factors and circumstances that lie beyond the nonschool settings. These opportunities will only 
coach’s control. By its nature, coaching also brings continue to grow as more swimming, tennis, and 
into close contact people with different personal- golf facilities open; as sport camps and instructional 
ities who may have different expectations of the sport academies continue to expand; and as public 
sport experience, whose short- and long-term goals interest in Community nonprofit sport initiatives 
may conflict, and who may perceive the world of increases. These careers serve as the focus of this 
athletics in different ways. chapter. 

The previous chapter focused on careers in All of the professions in this sphere involve 
teaching physical education. Although teaching helping participants to develop either modest or 
is a major professional track in kinesiology, some high levels of motor skill and sport tactics. The 

my 364 



Chapter 14| Careers in Coaching and Sport Instruction 365 

participants served by coaches and instructors vary at different skill levels. An instructor’s efforts are 
tremendously, from young children to university usually, though not always, directed toward novices 
students and athletes to professional sport figures. or those lacking a high level of proficiency—for 
There is also great variation in the settings in which example, young children in a community youth 
these coaches and instructors work—for example, sport development program, middle-aged people 
public and alternative schools, community agencies in a beginner swimming class at a community pool, 
and organizations, colleges and universities, sport and people of all ages who want to improve their 
clubs and academies, and professional organiza- golf swing by consulting a teaching professional 
tions that are operated as businesses. Although at the local driving range. 
institutions and organizations employ most coaches In contrast, coaches at the high school, college, 
and instructors, many are freelancers; that is, they and professional levels typically direct their plan- 
are self-employed instructors (e.g., in gymnastics, ning and efforts toward an already skilled popula- 
golf, baseball, tennis, swimming) who operate their tion. Teams at the high school level are composed 
own small companies. primarily of students with above-average physical 

proficiency for their age and gender. College teams 
tend to be populated by an even more select group 

What Are Coaching 
culled from the best of the high school teams, and, 

and Sport Instruction? of course, professional and elite G.e., internation- 
al-level) athletes comprise an even more highly 

Coaching and sport instruction have a long and sto- skilled group. As the level of competition increases, 
ried tradition, extending back as far as the ancient the pool of eligible performers gets smaller, and the 
Greeks and Romans. We know, for example, that pressure to win typically becomes greater. 
coaches were hired by early Greek municipalities Even youth sport programs, whether inadver- 
and supervised by public officials called gymna- tently or by design, tend to weed out those who are 
siarchs, for the job of teaching young people how less physically gifted in their age groups, leaving 
to compete in various forms of athletics. Although a population of relatively skilled youngsters when 
held in high esteem, these coaches could be compared with others of similar age. Sad to say, 
demanding taskmasters. One notable Greek vase this phenomenon appears to have become the rule 
depicts a trainer (or coach) flogging two pankra- rather than the exception. As a result, kids who are 
tiasts (athletes who performed a vicious form of physically less mature are typically eliminated early 
wrestling popular in the early Olympic Games) for in the selection process and therefore do not have 
gouging each other in the face while wrestling. an equal opportunity to continue with the sport. 

Now, many centuries later, coaches continue to Despite these differences, teaching and coach- 
be popular and well regarded, and many continue ing share many functions. Both involve instructing 
to have reputations as demanding taskmasters and interacting with people on a personal basis; in 
(although none flog their athletes!). Some ply their fact, the dictionary definition of coaching is close 
trade in the anonymous quarters of community to that of teaching. For example, both a gymnas- 
gymnasiums and school athletic fields; others tics coach and a gymnastics teacher try to impart 
work in the glaring spotlight of the collegiate and knowledge, help gymnasts develop skill at certain 
professional ranks. Some coaches earn very little; routines, instill in them a love of the activity, and 
others earn millions. Regardless of fame or fortune, help them improve their performances. Improve- 
coaching and sport instruction can be a fascinating ment comes both through practice and condition- 
and rewarding career. This chapter helps you deter- ing and through explanations, instructions, and 
mine whether it might be one for you to consider. feedback (verbal as well as visual, in the form of 

Coaching and sport instruction are similar in video replays and demonstrations). 
many ways. Both are performed by professionals So, how do we determine what distinguishes 
who have mastered knowledge about physical instruction or teaching from coaching? One good 
activities, as well as the skills and techniques way to address the question is to distinguish 
required to transmit that knowledge to other between the acts of teaching and coaching and the 
people. Both also require expertise in designing professions of teaching and coaching. The acts of 
practice experiences to stimulate learning and both teaching and coaching may be designed as 
conditioning experiences to enhance performance. attempts to alter the thinking, feelings, or behavior 

But coaching and instruction also differ sig- of a particular clientele by systematically exposing 
nificantly; in particular, they tend to teach people them to physical activity experiences, along with 



mE 366 Introduction to Kinesiology 

appropriate verbal and visual experiences, to bring positions can switch back and forth. Indeed, it is 

about predetermined outcomes. Figure 14.1 shows safe to say that most coaches consider themselves 

the overlap in the acts of instruction and coaching, to be, first and foremost, teachers; conversely, 

as well as their uniqueness; the areas that do not sport instructors, particularly at the youth level, 
overlap tend to be those directly related to the commonly envision themselves as coaches. Youth 
clients served. sport coaches, for example, spend much of their 

As mentioned earlier, instruction focuses primar- time teaching children how to perform basic skills; 
ily on novices, whereas coaching focuses on more their emphasis is not, and should not be, on who 
advanced performers. As a consequence, instruc- wins the games but rather on maximizing each 
tion focuses mainly on skill development, whereas player’s level of expertise. However, coaching at 
coaching encompasses skill refinement coupled the high school varsity or college level usually 
with learning about tactics (strategy), particularly involves more of the unique aspects of coaching 
in net and invasion sports. Coaching is usually identified in figure 14.1. 
directed toward select or advanced populations Sometimes, professional sport instructors serve 
who, at least to some extent, have already acquired in a role that we might define as coach-instruc- 
the skills, knowledge, and attitudes essential for tor—for example, when they supply instruction 
performance. Thus, the overriding emphasis for on a one-to-one basis to professional golf or tennis 
coaches, particularly at higher levels of competi- players. In fact, some of the more successful golfers 
tion, must be placed on individual and team per- regularly visit such instructors (also called teaching 
formance because success is typically measured professionals or “swing doctors”) to correct flaws 
by wins and losses. As a result, coaches, especially that have caused their performance to deteriorate. 
those in the college and professional ranks, tend to Many professional tennis players include staff in 
direct much of their effort toward improving skills their entourage who perform the same function. 
already learned, rather than teaching new or basic Regardless of whether one refers to these people 
skills, and then meshing that improved technical as teaching professionals, golf or tennis instruc- 
ability with sport-specific tactics and a high level tors, or coaches, they play fundamentally different 
of muscular fitness, aerobic fitness, or both. roles—and work in quite different settings—than 

Overall, coaches may spend a disproportionate do coaches of scholastic athletics or college-level 
amount of time motivating and conditioning athletes, athletes or those who supply sport instruction to 
as well as helping them to refine and retain acquired large groups in municipal recreation settings. 
skills and tactics to maximize performance. Sport Despite this considerable overlap between the 
instructors, on the other hand, are likely to focus acts of coaching and instruction, the same is not 
their efforts on helping their clients to acquire new true for the professions of coaching and sport 
skills and learn how to apply them in real-life settings. instruction. By profession, we refer to the entire 

But making too fine a distinction between the range of duties carried out by a coach or instructor 
acts of teaching and coaching is probably not beyond the direct acts of coaching and instructing. 
useful because the roles associated with these Instructors and coaches must carry out different 

The act of Activities common to acts The act 
sport instruction of sport instruction and coaching of coaching 

ae ee: 

“oF * . wer Se ae 
____ Instructional accttiviivli tiesS s, i » 

~ designed to alter ates 
knowledge, and ae wi 

ve respect to physica acai 
# fig ; as 
Ep a 

ie 

GALT] The acts of sport coaching and of sport instruction are characterized by considerable overlap. 



Chapter 14| Careers in Coaching and Sport Instruction 367 

Case Study in Determining Practice Schedule 
Mohammed was the newly appointed coach of the high school track team. He had plenty of expe- 
rience as a runner, having competed at the international level, but little experience in performing 
or coaching field events. He was concerned about his lack of knowledge of the weight events, 
particularly the shot put. He had read books about the skill but wanted to take a scientific approach 
that incorporated all that he had learned in kinesiology classes. He reflected on what he had 
learned in motor learning and performance, biomechanics, and exercise physiology to come up 
with a basic practice plan. 

Bringing his analytical ability to bear, Mohammed recognized that the shot put is a closed skill 
(one with few environment constraints) that requires improvement in both physical performance 
Capacity (strength, mainly) and skill development (specifically, a coordinated series of perfectly 
executed movements) in order to achieve better results. He reviewed his notes from his classes 
and believed that he now had a good handle on the mechanics of the event and understood 
the best way to develop athletes’ strength. The question of how to arrange practices, however, 
remained unanswered. 

Your Decision 

How would you design practices for this event? Would you vary the practice conditions by changing 
the distance and direction of the athletes’ throws? Would you have the athletes perform the move- 
ments without the shot during early trials? Would you have them practice the skill repetitively—say, 
at least 25 successive trials in each practice session? 

Resolution 

Given that the shot put is a closed skill, Mohammed decided to have his athletes focus on devel- 
oping a stereotyped, effective movement pattern rather than varying the practice conditions from 
trial to trial. He realized that expert performance of this skill ultimately depends on executing a 
power-producing series of movements and that the weight of the shot might cause his athletes 
to develop mechanically incorrect technique in early trials. Therefore, he decided to move slowly 
by first having athletes work on technique and then introducing the shot. Finally, he recognized 
that “massed practice trials” would lead quickly to fatigue and faulty performance patterns, so 
he adopted a “distributed” schedule in which his athletes performed only 15 trials per practice. 
Moreover, the throws were interspersed with walking to retrieve the shot and with rehearsing the 
movements without the shot. 

professional responsibilities in different occupa- 2. The nature of the off-task duties also differs 
tional subcultures. Figure 14.2 shows the differ- between the two jobs. Whereas instructors 
ences and similarities in the instruction and coach- spend time maintaining records, repairing 
ing professions. As you can see, the similarities and maintaining equipment, advertising 
here are considerably fewer than the similarities classes, and (if teaching in an institution) 

between the acts of instruction and coaching shown attending to institutional demands, coaches 

in figure 14.1. There are two major differences: are more likely to become absorbed in the 
; off-task duties described in figure 14.2. 

1. Instructors tend to spend more of their 
time involved in on-task duties—that is, 

in disseminating knowledge and moiding OKEY-POINT 28 Ul bee Sees. 2B lies h 

J ior. h end less of : : ‘ 
Queene pas eee The acts of sport coaching and sport instruction are 
their time on this work and more on the off- ore" ws ; 

more similar than distinct; the professions of sport 
task duties of recruiting, scouting, review- : ; : tie 
ing video, planning strategy, addressing coaching and sport instruction are more distinct than 

compliance (eligibility) issues, scheduling, similar. 

budgeting, and fund-raising. 



BE 368 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Responsibilities of sport instructors Responsibilities of coaches 

y * 

7 | 

¢ Repairing and maintaining equipment ¢ Monitoring security and preparing 
* Organizing records of student progress playing facilities and locker rooms 
¢ Advertising classes ¢ Scheduling and planning trips 
¢ Meeting with parents ¢ Recruiting players 
¢ Monitoring security of facility ¢ Meeting with parents 
¢ Keeping financial records ¢ Scouting other teams 
¢ Participating in professional organizations ¢ Reviewing game film 
¢ Continuing education or certification * Talking to media 

¢ Hiring personnel 
¢ Evaluating officials 
* Motivating and counseling athletes 

GUTavw) Differences and similarities in the coaching and sport instruction professions. 
Based on the study of G.M. DeMarco, “Physical Education Teachers of the Year: Who They Are, What They Think, Say, and Do,” Teaching Elementary Phys- 
ical Education 10, no. 2 (1999): 11-13. 

Clearly, then, at the most fundamental level, the act Community Settings 
of instruction is essentially the same as the act of 

Community organizations offer a variety of settings 
coaching. To some extent, all teachers are coaches, 

for coaching and sport instruction. Because most of 
and all coaches are teachers. However, when we 

the organizations offering sport programs in these 
consider the professional responsibilities of the two 

settings are nonprofit, many of the coaching posi- 
roles, we see that the jobs are actually quite different. 

tions are filled by volunteers, although some youth 
Even when a person plays both roles in the same 

and adult sport leagues hire part-time coaches. 
job—for example, when a school or college physical 

Parks and recreation departments, for example, 
education teacher also coaches—the demands of 

usually sponsor athletic leagues for both youth 
the two roles are distinct. Therefore, although we 

and adults. Similar opportunities are provided by 
recognize similarities in many of the professional 

other organizations, such as the YMCA and YWCA, 
responsibilities of coaches and teachers, we also need 

the Young Men’s Hebrew Association (YMHA) and 
to keep in mind that each operates in a distinctly dif- 

Young Women’s Hebrew Association (YWHA), the 
ferent occupational subculture and requires unique 

American Youth Soccer Organization (AYSO), the 
professional knowledge and skills. In addition, the 

US Youth Soccer Organization, the U.S. Volleyball 
ultimate goals to be achieved are not always identical. 

Association, the U.S. Fencing Association, and var- 
ious other national sport organizations. 

Settings for Coaching Community sites for coaching and sport instruc- 
tion may also be overseen by municipal recreation 

and Sport Instruction 
authorities. Although recreation has developed into 

A work setting usually defines the job expectations a specialized profession in its own right, the career 
and duties of those who work there. Coaches and aspirations of recreation graduates and kinesiology 
sport instructors work in many different settings, and graduates sometimes overlap. If a career in munici- 
their duties and responsibilities vary accordingly. pal recreation interests you, explore the possibility 
Most of the settings fall into one of the following of obtaining an undergraduate minor in recreation 
three categories: community based, institutional, or taking some courses in recreation leadership 
and commercial. and management. 



Chapter 14] Careers in Coaching and Sport Instruction 369 

Profile of Boys & Girls Clubs of America 
The mission of the Boys & Girls Clubs of America is to promote a safe, positive and inclusive 
environment for youth and teens, to support them in reaching their full potential. The organization 
had its beginnings 160 years ago, and it currently offers a variety of programs for children of all 
ages and interests. 

>» Overview: Safe and fun places for youth during out-of-school hours; diverse programming 
for participants 

> Scope: National (4,300 locations in 50 states) 
> Locations: In cities and towns, in public housing, on Native lands throughout the country, 

and on military installations worldwide 

> Setting: Community-based organizations, public schools, recreation centers (Boys & Girls 
Clubs of America, 2018) 

— 1,900 school-based clubs 

— 490 affiliated youth centers on U.S. military installations worldwide 

— 1,100 clubs in rural areas 

— 280 clubs in public housing 

— 205 clubs on Native lands (largest youth development provider for Native youth) 

>» Participants: Kindergarten through high school students 

» Funding: Public grants, corporations, foundations, investment income 

Community organizations are civic minded; the Joy of Sports Foundation in Washington, DC, 
indeed, their first goal is to improve the social, which is one of the largest community programs 
physical, and moral development of the local com- to serve at-risk young people through sport; it uses 
munity. Think back to the discussion in chapter both paid and volunteer staff. 
10 of the two value systems that influence profes- Instructors in community settings may work in 
sional conduct. Coaches and instructors working pool areas teaching swimming classes, in gym- 
in community programs are usually guided by a nasiums or weight rooms facilitating adult group 
social trustee, civic professionalism orientation. For exercise programs, in testing rooms conducting 
funding, community organizations rely on munic- stress tests and fitness evaluations, or in conference 
ipal funding, user fees, dues, private and public rooms engaging in health and nutrition consulting. 
contributions from agencies such as the United Typical worksites for coaches of community-based 
Way, and business or corporate sponsorships of sport teams include gymnasiums; skating rinks; 
athletic teams. Some organizations are sponsored soccer, football, softball, and baseball fields; and 

directly by tax money; most are funded through tracks. Generally, games are played on the organi- 
donations and corporate sponsors. The Boys & zation’s property or on property owned by munic- 
Girls Clubs of America, for example, serve 4.7 mil- ipalities or schools. 
lion boys and girls at 4,300 locations in 50 states 
with a trained adult staff of 67,000 and more than Institutional Settings 
460,000 volunteers—and they do so through fund- 

Most of the sport instruction in institutional settings 
ing (approximately $230 million) provided by major 

corporations. Another prominent organization is takes place in physical education class (see chapter 



a 370 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Settings for Coaching 

Community Settings Institutional Settings Commercial Settings 

YMCA, YWCA Middle schools National and Olympic facilities 

Boys & Girls Clubs of America High schools Private clubs, camps, 
and sport academies 

Municipal recreation facilities Private secondary schools 

National youth sport programs Community colleges Professional sport organizations 

Various nonprofit organizations Colleges and universities Freelance and 
entrepreneurial settings 

13). As an arm of education, physical education is Scholastic coaches are often in the public eye, 
part of the formal curriculum in public and private particularly when they coach football or basketball. 
schools, colleges, and universities. However, sport Because athletic teams are viewed as represen- 
also is an important part of the extracurricular pro- tatives of the school to the broader community, 
gram in educational institutions. As a high school coaches must pay careful attention to the conduct 
student, you probably gained an appreciation for of their athletes and, of course, to their own con- 
the importance that people in your school and duct. Practices and games typically take place on 
community placed on interscholastic sports. As school property; travel to other schools is necessary 
a college student, you are undoubtedly aware of for away games. Coaches usually work during after- 
how important sport programs have become for school hours, and in some sports the season can 
institutional recognition and recruitment. Many last more than 5 months. In many private schools, 
universities are identified more by the success of every student is required to be a member of at least 
their football and basketball programs than by their one interscholastic team, and coaches must accept 
academic excellence. all willing and committed students onto their teams, 

regardless of their athletic talent. Consequently, the 
High School and Middle School Settings range of talent among team members in private 
In public and private schools, coaches usually schools can vary greatly. In these situations, the 
serve on the teaching faculty and perhaps in an coach must be able to deal effectively with both 
administrative capacity as well; alternatively, some highly skilled and less skilled players. 
districts hire part-time coaches if fewer full-time 
teachers opt to take on these additional responsi- College and University Settings 
bilities. These part-time coaches may have expertise Work settings at the college level vary according to 
in their chosen sport but sometimes have little the type of institution and the level of athletic compe- 
training in kinesiology or education. Fortunately, tition. Coaches at community colleges usually coach 
school boards and superintendents are increasingly one sport and teach kinesiology classes, although 
recognizing the need to hire only fully qualified the setup can vary. Teaching and coaching take 
coaches to work with student athletic teams. Still, place in the same facility, which generally consists 
in most cases, coaching is an add-on to the individ- of an office complex, gymnasiums, weight rooms, 
ual’s primary responsibility as a teacher of physical swimming pools, and an athletic training room. 
education or another subject. Because the programs at many community colleges 

and technical colleges cater to part-time adult stu- 
dents, some schools do not place strong emphasis 

a 19 od] 1 ice a aa ee, on athletic programs. At these schools, athletic pro- 
For middle and high school coaches, directing the grams and facilities may be modest, although that 
team is merely one of many responsibilities they have is not always the case. As you might expect, larger 

at the school. For most, the primary responsibility is schools that emphasize sport tend to have larger, 

teaching classes. better-equipped facilities. Athletic programs at larger 
community colleges usually participate as members 



Chapter 14| Careers in Coaching and Sport Instruction 

of the National Junior College Athletic Association Among larger U.S. colleges and universities, 
(NJCAA), which sponsors national championship coaches are commonly employed full-time to coach 
competitions each year in a variety of sports. The a single sport. Moreover, at universities whose teams 
NJCAA has more than 500 member institutions in rank among the top in the country, a head coach 
24 regions and offers sports in Divisions I through often operates more as a CEO than as an instructor, 
III to more than 45,000 athletes. overseeing a team of assistant coaches and a vast 

The worksites at some small 4-year colleges are operation involving high-pressure recruiting and 
similar to those of community colleges. Coaches intense publicity. In fact, this is the rule rather than 
at small colleges are likely to hold faculty posts in the exception in Division I football and in Division 
kinesiology in addition to their coaching respon- I basketball (men’s and women’s). Coaches at large 
sibilities. College coaching linked to a faculty public universities are often the highest-paid public 
position almost always requires a master’s degree; employees in their state, earning several times more 
coaches in some small institutions gain tenure as than the university president or the governor. The 
faculty members. Coaches who serve as instructors large salary comes with heightened expectations—if 
in the physical activity academic program must head coaches are not highly successful, they are 
juggle the responsibilities assigned by the head of quite likely to be replaced. 
the kinesiology department with those assigned by For example, the Football Bowl Subdivision 
the athletic director. In addition, coaches at smaller (FBS) includes 128 member teams, and after the 
colleges often become very involved in the social 2015 season ended there were 28 head coach 
and academic life of the school. Usually, the outside openings; all were filled by January 2016 (Barnett, 
obligations and pressure to win are not as burden- 2015). Thus, about 22 percent of FBS head coaches 
some at small (Division II] colleges as they are for lost their jobs! To compound the situation, when 
coaches at the highest level (Division I), although a head coach is fired, most of his or her assistants 
self-imposed pressure to win is a potential cause and support staff are also fired when the new head 
of stress at all levels of competition. coach arrives. 

Surging Salaries for Division | Football and Basketball Coaches 

Success (i.e., winning) translates into big bucks in Division | athletics. If you want to work at a 
major university and make a tremendous amount of money, then plan to become a big-time bas- 
ketball or football coach. According to a USA Today report (USA Today, 2020b) on the salaries of 
NCAA Division | basketball coaches, 

> John Calipari (University of Kentucky) was the highest-paid men’s basketball coach at more 
than $8.1 million per year (USA Today, 2020a), 

>» 29 NCAA men’s basketball coaches earned more than $3 million—more than the average 
for chancellors at the same universities, and 

> 7O men’s NCAA basketball coaches made more than $1 million each. 

On the women’s side, the salaries are not as extreme, but coaches can still rank among the 

highest-salaried individuals at an institution. Coincidentally, the highest-paid women’s coach is a 

man, Geno Auriemma (University of Connecticut), who was scheduled to receive $2.6 million for 

the 2017-2018 season—not including income from his camps and endorsements (USA Today, 

2017). Auriemma is arguably the most successful active coach in either men’s or women’s NCAA 

basketball: therefore, it is evident that the top women's coaches, though paid well, still do not 

earn on the same level as the men’s coaches. 

According to the same report, 49 NCAA Division | football coaches were paid more than $3 million 

in 2019. The list was topped by Nick Saban (University of Alabama), whose total compensation 

was more than $9.3 million (USA Today Coaching Salary Database 2020). In most cases, the 

salaries paid to Division | football and basketball coaches are much higher not only than those of 

the presidents at their universities but also more than that of the president of the United States. 

Do you think the salaries of top coaches and professional athletes are fair in terms of their value 

to an institution or to society as a whole? Why, or why not? 



Ml 372 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Professional Issues in Kinesiology 

Expertise: Predicting Future Talent 
Coaches of advanced and elite athletes must often try to identify athletes with potential. It is 

extremely challenging to assess expertise and to identify potential for outstanding performance. 

Expertise in a sport involves a complex combination of sport-specific, fitness-related, and psy- 

chological factors. This complexity is heightened by the uncertainties inherent in developing such 

abilities, as well as genetics, injuries, training issues, and motivational factors. 

Thus, you can see why predicting outstanding future expertise poses a difficult problem. In fact, 

measuring and understanding the variables involved in expertise and talent development constitute 

specialized subdisciplines in kinesiology (see the section later in this chapter on the growth of 

sport statistics and performance analytics), and coaches must integrate them in order to succeed 

at identifying talent. One caveat: A given sport metric that best describes elite performance may 
not be the most important factor at lower levels of competitiono r in athlete development. 

Coaches at 4-year colleges and universities coaching job in such a setting, make sure that you 
work in athletic facilities that consist of numerous feel comfortable working in the environment of 
offices, gymnasiums and practice centers, weight the specialized institution and serving its mission. 
rooms and conditioning rooms, swimming pools, 
sport science centers, dietetic and dining centers, Commercial Sport Settings 
and athletic training rooms. Schools that offer 
football commonly have a separate stadium and Commercial sport settings are those in which sport 

office complex for the football staff. These ath- instruction or coaching is offered as a product or 

letic facilities typically house not only coaches service in a business venture, usually by self-em- 

and athletic administrators (e.g., athletic directors ployed professionals. These settings range from 

and their assistants) but also compliance officers, the huge arenas, stadiums, and practice facilities of 

academic tutors and counselors, sport marketers professional teams to tennis, swimming, or squash 

and promotion personnel, media relations officers, facilities at country clubs and health spas. An 

facility directors, and event directors. Although the increasing number of human performance clubs are 

structure of university athletic departments varies, focusing attention on the development of sport skills 

all athletic faculty report to an athletic director, and improved athletic performance, in addition to 

who in turn reports directly to a vice president or exercise. For-profit sport team clubs are fairly new 

to the university president. developments in the United States but are quite 
common in Europe and Australia, where there are 

Other Institutional Settings fewer school-based sport teams. Private academies 

Opportunities for coaching are also available in and sport clubs are likely to increase in number in 

many other institutional settings, including res- the future in the United States and in the world. 

idential and nonresidential schools for children Coaches and teaching professionals who work 

with disability (e.g., schools for people with deaf- with elite athletes often have the most diverse 

ness or blindness), residential juvenile institutions worksites of all of their colleagues. Some coaches 

for youth who are troubled or disadvantaged, work at a fixed facility, whereas others teach and 

detention facilities, and military settings. In addi- coach at a variety of locations. Some itinerant golf 

tion, opportunities are now available for coaches, or tennis teachers work out of their homes or car 

instructors, and administrators in some large trunks. Other sport instructors own and operate 

churches that have excellent facilities for sport martial arts studios, gymnastics schools, or swim- 

and exercise programs. In all of these settings, the ming clubs. Of course, coaches of professional 

institution’s philosophy and mission guide coaches sport teams in football, baseball, soccer, hockey, 

and coaching practices. Generally, sport in such and basketball work in fixed settings as employees 
of 

settings is intended to accomplish an educational sport organizations. Professional coaches work 

or recreational mission rather than provide enter- at permanent facilities similar to those in colleges 

tainment for spectators. If you are considering a and universities; such facilities contain office space, 



Chapter 14| Careers in Coaching and Sport Instruction 373 

practice and game areas, weight rooms, and athletic A few sport instructors who work with elite 
training rooms. In this type of organization, coaches athletes work at a single site, usually a school or 
usually report to a general manager and team owner. academy with residences on or near the campus 

Elite athletes hire specialized coach-instructors where budding teenage Olympic or professional 
who typically have their own experience as athletes athletes can stay for several months of the year. 
and coaches in the sport. These professionals tend For example, affluent parents who believe that 
to freelance and are often on the road, traveling to their children have a promising career in basket- 
their clients’ hometowns. For example, figure skating ball, baseball, ice hockey, golf, soccer, or tennis 
coaches work with high-caliber competitive figure might consider enrolling their children in the IMG 
skaters at the skaters’ home rinks. On the other Academy or another such organization. Aspiring 
hand, professional coaches who are employed by young golfers might also enroll full-time at the 
sport academies have the luxury of remaining at a International Junior Golf Academy in Hilton Head, 
fixed location. In the United States, these coaches South Carolina, where they spend much of the day 
may not hold a degree in kinesiology; in most other practicing and learning golf from highly skilled 
countries, elite coaches do hold bachelor’s and mas- instructors and attending campus-based prepara- 
ter’s degrees in kinesiology or sport science. tory schools. 

When we think of coaching and sport instruction 
settings, we usually think of the popular sports that 

AS CU UD we see every day on television. However, coaches 
In advanced sport settings, some coaches have a work in a variety of settings. For instance, instruc- 

stable worksite, whereas others coach at a variety of tors in rowing, kayaking, and canoeing work on 

facilities; still others are self-employed and may work rivers. With competitive rock climbing becoming 

out of their homes. more popular, we find instructors at indoor climb- 
ing walls, in the great outdoors scaling mountains, 

Sport Instruction on a Large Scale: IMG Academy 

IMG Academy is the world’s largest, most successful institution dedicated to multisport training 
and education. Two of IMG’s founders were kinesiology professors who transitioned into commer- 
cial sport. The annual enrollment consists ofj unior, collegiate, adult, and professional athletes 
from more than 80 countries. Although IMG may be best known for its famous alumni—including 
Andre Agassi (tennis), Vince Carter (basketball), and Adam Dunn (baseball)—you don’t have to 
be a serious competitor to take advantage of the programs. IMG Academy is situated on a gated, 
600-acre campus in Bradenton, Florida, that features golf driving ranges and practice facilities, 
tennis courts, baseball fields, turf training fields, indoor basketball facilities, sport performance 
facilities, gyms, clubhouses, and dormitories. It also has two cafeterias (one for adults and profes- 
sionals and one for students) and operates an on-campus restaurant for students in the evening. 
It offers youth sport camps in the following areas: 

>» Tennis » Basketball 

» Golf >» Lacrosse 

De SOCCE|| >» Football 

> Baseball >» Peak performance training 

Peak performance training encompasses a holistic approach to improving performance that includes 

physical, nutritional, mental, and leadership training. Young athletes stay in campus dormitories and 

have access to a highly competent teaching and coaching faculty. For all of this, their parents pay more 

than $30,000 per year. Tuition for the on-campus boarding school and fees for private lessons and 

other amenities can cost a grand total of $85,000 per year or even more. Yearly tuition for day students 

can exceed $70,000. IMG also offers peak performance training for college and professional athletes 

and boasts a number of former students who competed in the 2016 Rio Olympics. 



me 374 Introduction to Kinesiology 

and on stone or brick buildings in towns and ey e 
cities. Similarly, as interest continues to grow in Most physical activity programs in community settings 
ecotourism and outdoor adventure experiences, are offered by nonprofit organizations and parks and 
the need for instructors and coaches in outdoor 

recreation departments. 
recreation pursuits is expected to increase accord- 
ingly. In addition, each summer, camp directors, 
some with large budgets and impressive facilities 
and equipment, hire expert sport instructors to Community Youth 
oversee instructional operations; sport instructor Sport Development Leaders 
positions are also available at large resorts that 
sponsor extensive sport programs. One particularly exciting area of community work 

focuses on underserved youth. Many communities 
have experienced damaging social, economic, and 

Roles for Coaching and Sport political influences, most notably during the pan- 

Instruction Professionals demic of 2020, and these pressures have directly 
affected the ways in which human services are 

Professional sport instructors usually work with made available today. 
fairly small numbers of highly motivated learners, Throughout the United States, communities are 
athletes, or clients under optimal conditions in looking for solutions to the crises facing America’s 
which attention can be focused on one skill or youth. The typical approach has been to focus on 
activity. These peak performance experts typically what is wrong with young people and then develop 
work with individuals or with small groups of elite strategies and programs to solve the problem. This 
athletes, but they may also work with teams in con- traditional approach is well intended but focuses on 
cert with the team coach or manager to maximize kids’ deficiencies and problems rather than on their 
both individual and team performance. Let’s exam- capacities, skills, and assets. A newer approach 
ine more closely the duties and responsibilities of assumes that young people have knowledge and 
sport instructors and coaches. positive qualities that can be enhanced, and this 

asset-based model is increasingly being used by 

Community Physical community organizations in their physical activity 
settings for youth. 

Activity Program Instructors Physical activity is a particularly effective way 
Physical activity classes in community-based pro- to focus on kids’ capacities, skills, wellness, and 
grams are offered through municipal departments assets. The unique energy, human interactions, and 
of recreation and through other nonprofit agencies. creativity that are harnessed by physical activity 
For the most part, nonprofit organizations work on allow community-based leaders of physical activ- 
the front lines in an effort to strengthen commu- ity programs to see kids’ potentials and personal 
nities by providing needed services to individuals qualities that might otherwise go unnoticed. Fur- 
and families. Physical activity program leaders can thermore, youth development philosophy holds 
play an important role in meeting this challenge. that young people who are having difficulty in 
These leaders also teach older people in physical school or at home, or even those involved with 
activity programs offered by community centers, the juvenile justice system, can, when given the 
recreation facilities, retirement centers, and other proper opportunities, beat the odds and become 
nonprofit agencies. Adult programs may include contributing members of society. 
soccer, softball, tennis, swimming, golf, adult Because of the varied needs of community-based 
exercise, yoga, dance, and martial arts. Working in organizations, physical activity professionals at 
nonprofit agencies such as these can be rewarding this level perform a range of tasks that go beyond 
for professionals who are interested in serving an instruction. Typically, they direct physical activity 
older clientele. As with employment in all nonprofit programs, and this includes marketing and bud- 
settings, financial compensation tends to be lower geting for the programs. They may also perform 
than that in commercial or other institutional set- a variety of managerial duties, as well as tutoring, 
tings, but knowing that your services are valued mentoring, and overseeing literacy programs and 
can be a form of compensation in its own right. a host of other community services. If you are a 



Chapter 14] Careers in Coaching and Sport Instruction 

kinesiology major who wants to work with youth and tournaments. Outside the university setting, 
but not in a public school, then you may be inter- teaching professionals can be found at private, 
ested in becoming a community physical activity semiprivate, and public teaching facilities, where 
instructor. Salaries for some of these community they teach beginning, intermediate, advanced, or 
youth development positions tend to be lower elite players. Golf professionals, for example, may 
than those of public school teachers. However, work at a municipal golf course, giving lessons to 
they offer the reward of making a difference in the public and conducting golf camps or managing 
kids’ lives and knowing that you are contributing the pro shop or the clubhouse. Teaching profes- 
to your community. sionals have often attained national or international 

sport-specific certifications, some of which require 

Professional Sport Instructors continuing education and offer opportunities for 
specialization at advanced levels. 

Teaching professionals and professional sport 
instructors offer services (private or group lessons) 
in a specialized physical activity in a professional (280) 1S ee ee 
setting. Swim, golf, and tennis professionals who 

Professional sport instructors, who offer services (pri- 
work either as freelance entrepreneurs or at clubs 

vate or group lessons) solely in an area of expertise, are 
may also hold positions as faculty members at 
nearby colleges and universities. Sometimes they more like coaches than are any other teachers, yet they 

teach beginners, but they may also coach highly are free from the administrative duties of coaching. 

skilled individuals who are competing in leagues 

pi’ 
Coaches who work with underserved children not only help them develop athletic skills, but also teach them to be per- 

sonally and socially responsible young people. 

LWA/Stone/Getty Images 



mE 376 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Professional sport instructors typically are young people. Such academic programs also 

self-employed and are hired as independent con- include courses on youth agency administration, 

tractors. Therefore, their employment security principles of community organization, grant writ- 

depends on the satisfaction of their clients and of ing and fund-raising, social work, and community 

the owners or managers of the instructional facility development. Elective courses may also be helpful 

by whom they are contracted. Like professionals in in areas such as social work, counseling, and man- 

other fields, certified professional sport instructors agement. Another important part of these programs 
have a high degree of control over their careers. consists of internships that involve working with 
Their continued employment depends simply on children on a daily basis. 
their ability to provide services that their clients 
find valuable and are willing to pay for. Unlike Certification for Professional Sport Instructors 
coaches at institutions, however, professional Although a college degree is usually sufficient 
instructors are usually not covered by group insur- for coaches of the most popular sports (e.g., bas- 
ance policies or retirement plans. ketball, football, baseball) in the United States, 

More employment opportunities are available certification can be important when the coach 
at the beginner or intermediate levels than at the or instructor works in a noninstitutional setting, 
elite or professional levels. Although many people such as a sport club. Some sort of instructor or 
want to learn to swim, golf, rock-climb, and sky- coaching certification is offered in most organized 
dive, only a select few (in relative terms) want to sports. For example, most coaches of age-group 
work hard and pay an instructor to become profi- teams in large soccer clubs are certified Cicensed) 
cient enough to perform at an elite level. Incomes by the United States Soccer Federation (commonly 
for private instructors can range from only a few referred to as U.S. Soccer), the United Soccer 
thousand dollars per year (e.g., for a golf instructor Coaches (formerly known as the National Soccer 
whose office is the trunk of her car) to more than Coaches Association of America [NSCAA]), or both. 
$100,000 per year for an instructor-entrepreneur Likewise, in order to teach swimming or work as 
(e.g., owner, operator, and instructor of a successful a lifeguard, you will most likely be required to 
golf instruction school). secure American Red Cross certification as a Water 

Safety Instructor. This certification enables you 

Certification and Education of Instructors to teach swimming lessons and to coach swim 
or synchronized swim teams at a private club, 

Do you recall the discussion in chapter 10 about 
YMCA, or community center. If you are interested 

professionalism and the importance of certifi- 
in teaching scuba diving, you will need to acquire 

cation procedures to ensure that only the most 
certification from one or more of several organi- 

highly qualified people can serve in a professional 
zations; for example, the Professional Association 

capacity? In keeping with this approach, various 
of Diving Instructors offers certification from the 

types of credentials are required of the instructors 
assistant instructor level to the open-water scuba 

who lead community physical activity and sport 
instructor level. 

programs. 
In another example, the United States Fencing 

Certification for Community Physical Coaches Association (USFCA) offers a rigorous 
certification program through its Coaches College 

Activity Instructors 
Academy, in which would-be instructors move 

No certification programs exist specifically for through five levels. At levels I and II, they master 
youth sport development work focused on under- skills in using three weapons (épée, saber, foil); at 
served children; however, a bachelor’s degree is levels III through V, they specialize in one of the 
required for most positions, preferably from a weapons. To pass the first part of the certification 
program that offers a minor specialization in youth program, they must write a paper, propose a 1-year 
sport development. An increasing number of U.S. training cycle, and serve as an intern at Coaches 
colleges and universities are beginning to offer College Academy. At the highest level, they must 
bachelor’s and master’s degrees in kinesiology with develop a fencer under their supervision. Certifica- 
a concentration in what is termed either community tion is granted by the USFCA only when the fencer 
youth sport development or community leadership places in the United States Fencing Association 
(Hellison et al., 2000). These programs teach stu- ranking list or among the top 12 NCAA fencers. 
dents how to develop, implement, and evaluate Instructor certification programs are also offered 
community-based physical activity programs for by the men’s Professional Golf Association (PGA) 



Chapter 14| Careers in Coaching and Sport Instruction 

and the Ladies Professional Golf Association whom is responsible for one or more sports. Given 
(LPGA). One becomes a golf professional under the large number of athletes participating in a 
either PGA or LPGA auspices only by passing an variety of sports, these facilities tend to be in use 
arduous education and testing program that can throughout the year. In professional and collegiate 
take up to 8 years to complete. The PGA certifica- sports, athletes may spend more time with their 
tion program requires study, training, experience, strength and conditioning coaches than they do 
and testing in every aspect of golf—not only with their specific sport coaches. An increasing 
playing aptitude and teaching technique but also number of high schools are also recognizing the 
club repair, analysis and correction of swing flaws, value of having strength and conditioning special- 
tournament supervision, and the business side of ists on staff. 
golf (including golf shop operations). 

Certification programs also exist for many other Education and Credentials 
sports (see the section titled Certification and Con- Individuals who are certified as strength and 
tinuing Education of Coaches later in this chapter). conditioning specialists often hold other profes- 
If you plan a career as an instructor or coach in one sional credentials in areas such as athletic training, 
of these sports, you should begin working toward exercise physiology, physical therapy, and general 
certification in that sport as soon as possible. medicine. Credentialing of strength and condi- 
Finally, kinesiology professionals sometimes find tioning specialists is not associated with a degree 
a career in the national office of a certification or program, but a candidate must have a bachelor’s 
sport professional organization. degree and current cardiopulmonary resuscitation 

(CPR) certification in order to take the examina- 

Strength and Conditioning tion, which is sponsored by the National Strength 
and Conditioning Association (NSCA). A degree in 

Coach or Specialist 
kinesiology is preferred. To receive certification, 

Athletes need proper strength and conditioning in candidates must complete a two-part examination. 
order to achieve maximum physical performance, Passing both sections of the NSCA examination 
reduce the frequency of injury, and decrease the designates the person as a Certified Strength and 
possibility of cardiovascular disease. Strength and Conditioning Specialist (CSCS). Kinesiology pro- 
conditioning coaches are specialists who design fessionals who become certified as strength and 
weight training programs and cardiovascular con- conditioning specialists can compete more strongly 
ditioning programs based on the demands inher- in the job market and increase their salaries. Most 
ent in specific sports and on the particular needs NSCA members hold a degree beyond the level 
of individual athletes. In athletic settings, such of a bachelor’s degree. There is also a Collegiate 
as high schools, colleges, and with professional Strength and Conditioning Coaches Association 
teams, strength and conditioning specialists are (CSCCa) that offers certification. 
often called strength coaches. In these settings, Students who wish to become strength coaches 
strength and conditioning specialists may develop for a collegiate or professional team should have a 
individualized programs in conjunction with ath- bachelor’s degree in kinesiology or a related field. 
letic trainers, physical therapists, or physicians for Although no uniform course of study is offered at 
athletes who have specific deficits or who have the undergraduate level, excellent preparation can 
completed their rehabilitation programs. be obtained by choosing an emphasis in exercise 

science or fitness leadership with courses in perfor- 
Employment Settings mance assessment, program organization, and exer- 
Strength and conditioning specialists are employed cise leadership, in addition to the subdisciplinary 
by university athletic departments, professional core courses in a kinesiology undergraduate pro- 
sport teams, health clubs, and corporate fitness gram. Of course, it is useful to serve an internship 

centers. Universities with Division I-A athletic teams in an athletic department conditioning facility and 

have invested heavily in strength and conditioning to engage in appropriate volunteer experiences. In 

programs for athletes based on their recognition addition, certification as a teacher improves one’s 

of the contribution of training programs to athletic chances of being hired as a high school strength 

success. These programs are commonly housed in coach. One’s marketability can also be improved 

facilities of more than 15,000 square feet (1,400 through a graduate assistant position or internship 

square meters) and may feature a staff of four or position as a strength and conditioning coach. 

more strength and conditioning coaches, each of 



GE 378 Introduction to Kinesiology 

ShECPON eS Se when we first experienced them. For many current 

and former athletes, a coach is in the forefront of 
A kinesiology teaching degree is useful for gaining 

their minds and hearts. 
employment as a high school strength coach, while 
college athletic departments often look for candi- 
dates with a degree in kinesiology, NSCA or CSCCa 2e12 4.))| |ee ee 
certification, and experience in sports strength and As with being a teacher, being a coach involves build- 
conditioning. ing relationships that can change the life of another 

person for the better. 

Employment Opportunities 
In 2015, the median pay for strength and condi- Many opportunities are available to those who 
tioning specialists was $39,621 (Payscale, 2017). want to coach. Coaches work in many different 
There is, however, a wide variety in pay depending settings with a wide variety of people, ranging 
on experience and competitive level. Some profes- from young children to adults and from recreational 
sional strength coaches and head strength coaches athletes to elite performers. Some college and pro- 
at large universities with football programs earn fessional coaches are paid hundreds of thousands 
several hundred thousand dollars per year. or even millions of dollars, whereas others coach 

simply for the joy it brings. Coaches can be found in 

Coaching sport programs in communities, secondary schools, 
colleges and universities, and professional sports. 

We have all known people who touched our lives These different programs carry different coaching 
as no one else could. Often, our memories of these 

requirements, philosophies, and expectations, 
people is associated with emotions—respect, awe, 

and the coaches in these programs often differ in 
deference, and admiration—that seem as vibrant as 

educational background and coaching experience. 

Kinesiology Colleagues 

Chris Gilman 

Have you ever had the desire to work with high-level coaches 
and elite athletes at a major Division | university? Chris Gilman 

_ hadn't planned on such a career, but a series of opportunities 
and decisions provided a path for him. Initially, he had a keen 
interest in kinesiology and intended to follow in his father’s 
footsteps by becoming a health and physical educator. He 
graduated from Edinboro University in Pennsylvania with a BS 
in health and physical education, then taught and coached in 
the public school system while competing nationally in Olympic 
weightlifting. During that time, he began to realize the depth 
of his interest in strength training and coaching. 

After much thought, Gilman decided to follow his passions 
and accepted a graduate assistant football position at Clarion 
University, where he coordinated the football strength and con- 
ditioning program. To further his knowledge and experience, 
he spent a summer as a coaching intern at the University of 
North Texas, whereupon he decided that coaching collegiate 
strength and conditioning was the path that he wanted to 
follow. Two internships and one part-time position later, he 

eventually landed a fulltime position at the University of Pittsburgh. Chris worked with elite Pitt 
athletes for several years, and in 2020 accepted a similar position at Division |D uquesne University, 
where he serves as the strength and conditioning coach with several of their Olympic sport teams. 



Chapter 14 |C areers in Coaching and Sport Instruction 379 

Youth Sport Coaches regional or national scale. For example, age-group 
Municipal recreation departments usually offer a soccer and swimming programs can feature local, 
wide range of competitive youth and adult sports, regional, and national levels of competition. In 
which are the responsibility of the director or theory, the more gifted competitors are selected for 
supervisor of recreation. The range of activities the traveling teams, which offer the players oppor- 
offered depends on the ingenuity of the director tunities to compete with others of similar ability. 
and the available budget and facilities. Activities In practice, however, many of these programs are 
may include age-group swimming programs con- marked by inherent problems, such as player selec- 
ducted in public swimming pools, as well as highly tion. For example, in the sport of soccer the cost 
organized competitive programs in football, base- of playing with a youth club or youth travel team 
ball, softball, soccer, basketball, tennis, and other can become quite expensive, so some players are 
popular sports. Generally, but not always, these eliminated simply because their families cannot 

programs tend to deemphasize winning while afford the tuition, travel, and additional costs asso- 

emphasizing inclusiveness and fair play. They are ciated with the program. The added competitive 

usually staffed by volunteers who are recruited pressures imposed on young athletes are also not 

and trained by the program director. The director always in their best long-term interests. 

is also responsible for hiring and training officials Some of these programs hire professional 

to oversee the contests. Games usually take place coaches. Two examples in the United States are 

during evening hours, on weekends, or during the Pop Warner (football) and the Amateur Athletic 

summer. Union (basketball), both of which are private 

Organizations that rely on volunteer coaches national organizations that are more competitive 

often face a difficult task in finding qualified, cer- than community-based programs. Coaches at this 

tified coaches. Because many states do not have level usually spend more time performing the non- 

specific standards or certification requirements for teaching duties associated with coaching, such as 

volunteer coaches, anyone interested in coaching scouting and recruiting new talent, viewing game 

is often deemed qualified. Furthermore, commu- films, and organizing team travel. 

nity organizations are often short of volunteers, so Large soccer clubs field teams in several age 

anyone who wants to coach at this level can usually groups (U-10 through U-18 for boys and for girls). 

find a coaching position. Often, a parent of one of Even at young ages, these teams face intense pres- 

the participants assumes the role of coach. Coaches sure to win. Winning clubs attract more players, 

who have had formal education in kinesiology may which in turn generates more money for those 
clubs. Coaches are usually experienced players 

serve as administrators of large community-based 
themselves or are licensed by U.S. Soccer or United 

youth sport leagues or as instructors for coaching 
Soccer Coaches. The coaching staff is typically hired 

clinics offered to laypersons who coach in a youth 
and coordinated by the club’s director of coaching 

sport league. 
(DOC), who oversees the entire program. As a con- 

If you are interested in pursuing a career in 
sequence, coaching directors of large soccer clubs 

coaching, you can obtain excellent ground-floor 
often earn salaries comparable to those of most 

preparation by volunteering to coach a local youth 
college soccer coaches and are held to the same 

sport team during your undergraduate years. The 
high expectations. If their teams are successful 

experience will also help you determine whether 
(i.e., if they win), then these coaches are likely to 

coaching is the right profession for you. Consider, 
keep their positions; if not, they may experience 

however, that the essentials of coaching at the 
the same fate as college and professional coaches 

youth level differ from those required at the high 
who do not win. 

school and college levels. 
One relatively recent development in youth 

sport involves the rise of private sport programs KEYED ON [eee eee ree eee ee ee 
in which, for a fee, children join “travel teams” or 

“club teams.” As the first name implies, these teams Community coaches volunteer in community-based 

travel around a county or state to experience com- sport programs that range from educational, inclusive, 

petitive interleague play. Proceeds from team fees and relatively noncompetitive programs to those that 

are sometimes used to pay the coach, although in emphasize competition, performance, and winning. 

many cases the coaches are still volunteers. Some 

civic government programs offer competition on a 



mi 380 Introduction to Kinesiology 

When Commercialism and Professionalism Threaten Youth Sport 

People who are committed to the educational benefits of youth sport programs face a growing 

problem in the tendency for organizations, media, and corporations to exploit them for commercial 

gain. For instance, some people question whether the Little League World Series, televised around 

the world, is appropriate for young children. Should preteens be placed on a world stage where 

they are critiqued, ridiculed, and, in the opinion of some, exploited for financial gain? The 2018 

tournament games were televised on ESPN and averaged more than a million viewers. The cham- 

pionship game drew a television audience of more than 3 million viewers worldwide. Imagine the 

overwhelming pressure experienced by any young player whose error or poor play might ultimately 

cost the team a game, or even a world title, in front of an international audience. 
Others question the increasing trend for professional sport organizations to sign athletically 

promising young children to professional contracts and commercial endorsements. This is not a 
recent phenomenon. For many years sponsors and professional clubs have tried to sign young 
athletes to lucrative multiyear contracts in the hope that they will mature into professional stand- 
outs. For example, in 2003, Nike signed Freddy Adu, an exceptionally skilled American soccer 
player who was just 13 years old, to a $1 million endorsement contract. In 2004, Adu became 
the youngest U.S. athlete to sign a major league contract in more than 115 years when hej oined 
D.C. United as the number one overall pick in the Major League Soccer SuperDraft. Thus, at an 
early age, Adu was thrown into the competitive spotlight, wnere he experienced the pressures and 
expectations that come with fame. Adu has not achieved the level of prominence in the soccer 
world that was expected of him. Since making his professional debut as a 14-year-old with D.C. 
United, he has played with 14 different teams, most recently the Las Vegas Lights of the USL. At 
this writing he is without a team. 

That cautionary tale has not stopped other top professional teams from copying Nike’s move, 
and in some cases it actually provides benefits. Bayern Munich, Germany’s richest and histori- 
cally most successful professional soccer team, signed youth prodigy Mehmet Ekici when he was 
8 years old, then sold his rights to Werner Bremen for €5 million. In 2011, Real Madrid, a top 
Spanish club, signed young prodigy Leonel Angel Coira to its youth academy after seeing him in 
tryouts. He was 7 years old! Leonel has not disappointed. The talented Argentine youngster was 
incorporated into Madrid’s famous youth academy and continued to attract interest from many 
teams after scoring more than 300 goals for Los Merengues. Leonel’s signing at such an early 
age reflects the emerging philosophy of top professional soccer teams that try to invest in fresh 
talent as early as possible to avoid paying huge transfer fees when their talent blossoms. For 
these young athletes, then, soccer is no longer merely a “youth sport,” and the pressure imposed 
on them is intense. 

Coaching in Institutional Settings 
Working at an institution requires physical activity 

Institutional coaches work in educational institutions professionals to relinquish some autonomy in carry- 
such as secondary schools (i.e., middle, junior high, ing out their duties. Generally, coaches working in an 
and high schools), colleges, and universities. As institution do not enjoy the freedom of freelancers; on 
mentioned earlier, they may also serve in specialized the other hand, they do reap the benefit of a steady 
residential institutions for young people who have a and reliable income. Coaches who work in an institu- 
disability or are socially disruptive; some coaching tion must comply with institutional expectations and 
opportunities are also available in the armed ser- conduct themselves in accordance with established 
vices. The coach strives to draw out each athlete’s codes of conduct. Ultimately, these coaches serve at 
potential and guide them in overcoming personal the behest of the institution’s chief administrator or 
challenges and achieving personal success within board of directors. 
their limitations. Coaching duties include teaching 
physical skills; keeping individual and team statis- Coaching in Middle and Secondary Schools 
tics; scheduling practices, games, and tournaments; In the 2018-2019 school year, the total number 
and managing and maintaining equipment. of participants in high school sport in the United 



Chapter 14| Careers in Coaching and Sport Instruction 331 iz 

States was 7,937,491, the third-highest total ever varies depending on the governing body in ques- 
(National Federation of State High School Associa- tion. Typically, however, secondary school coaches 
tions, 2019). Of that total, 4,534,758 were boys and spend 8 to 10 hours per week in after-school prac- 
3,402,733 were girls. The task of coaching these tices. When competitive play begins, the number of 
athletes requires an enormous number of people. practice hours may decrease to 8, whereas game 
For those who love sport and love being around hours may total 4 to 6 per week. Some coaches 
young people and serving as a positive role model, have early-morning practice schedules; others have 
coaching can be an exciting and rewarding career. late-afternoon or early-evening schedules. 
At the same time, you should factor a certain dose In addition to spending time at practices and 
of realism into your decision about whether to games, coaches shoulder many responsibilities 
pursue coaching as a career. The most important behind the scenes (see figure 14.2). To varying 
point may be the fact that coaches work many degrees, all coaches are involved in organizing and 
hours for relatively low compensation. In high scheduling team meetings and practices, ordering 
school, even the coaches of major sports such as equipment, maintaining and overseeing inventory, 
football often earn only a small stipend on top checking athletes’ eligibility, arranging transporta- 
of their regular teaching salary. The committed tion to and from events, talking with members of 
coaches who love what they do will tell you that the media, preparing for home events, fund-raising, 
the money is merely icing on the cake; the real and organizing end-of-season banquets. The extent 
compensation for them consists of the rewards of of coach involvement in these activities depends 
getting close to the kids on their teams, playing a in part on the size of the coaching staff and the 
substantial role in their development, and earning number of support personnel. For example, some 
the respect of the community at large. Weigh these schools have a full-time athletic director (AD) who 
considerations before you make your decision. is responsible for organizing home contests. Other 

schools may have a part-time AD who must delegate 
that responsibility to a coach. Likewise, some sports 

JoSS 000 2o (especially football) require many assistant coaches, 

Secondary-level school coaches typically spend their to whom head coaches can delegate specific duties. 

days teaching and receive an additional stipend for The differences in coaching at the various age 

coaching. levels hinge on the athletes’ developmental differ- 
ences. Some middle school athletes are “diamonds 
in the rough” who have the potential to be excel- 

Middle, junior high, and high school coaches are lent athletes but are physically undeveloped (i.e., 
usually certified public school teachers who teach prepubescent and small) compared with others 
a full schedule and receive a stipend for taking on on the team. Some may have just gone through a 
the extracurricular activity of coaching. Certified, growth spurt and need to relearn a given skill in 
part-time coaches who aren’t members of the their resized body. For example, Michael Jordan, 
school faculty may be hired to coach specific teams. arguably one of the best professional basketball 
Although the qualifications for coaches in the players ever to play the sport, did not make his high 
public schools vary by state, they typically require school varsity team as a sophomore. He grew four 
a teaching or coaching certification and a back- inches the next year, trained hard, and became the 
ground check. Coaches are among their school’s top player on the team as a junior. As a senior, he 

most visible representatives. Unlike teachers, who was selected as a McDonald’s All-American. 

work within the space of the classroom—where Middle and junior high school coaches have the 

their performance is assessed only by students, unique responsibility of introducing young athletes 

parents, and the principal—coaches perform in to the world of interscholastic sport, which requires 

front of all of the preceding people as well as the athletes to balance the attention they give to their 

community at large. Their successes and failures academics with their focus on sport. The primary 

may be covered in the daily newspaper. Their tasks for middle school coaches are 

performance is often the center of conversation at e to help students interested in athletics to 
local diners and coffee shops. Everyone is allowed develop a positive view of themselves as 
to hold an opinion (and to voice it!) about the athletes and 
effectiveness of a coach. ¢ to teach them important, complex physical 

In public secondary school athletics, the number 
skills and the basic strategies needed to 

of contact hours between coaches and athletes 
become competitive student-athletes. 



ma 382 Introduction to Kinesiology 

The Parent Problem 

One growing concern among sport scientists, program administrators, and parents stems from 

the fact that an overwhelming amount of parental involvement in youth sport is detrimental to the 

development and experiences of the young athletes. Parents who desperately want their children 

to succeed in competition can cause serious problems during events. Notable incidents have 

included a father being sent to jail for beating and berating a coach because the coach took his 

11-year-old son out of a game; a father (a dentist) who sharpened the nose guard of his son’s 

football helmet so that the son could slash opponents; and a police officer who gave a Little 
League pitcher $2 to hit a 10-year-old player with a fastball during a game. In Massachusetts, a 
hockey player’s father who was supervising a practice session was beaten to death by another 
father because of a disagreement about the rough play allowed during practice. 

Such incidents have prompted youth sport leaders to promulgate codes for sporting behavior 
among parents. In some states, parents must sign the code before their children are permitted 
to play. Efforts to educate parents and coaches about this issue have been aided by organiza- 
tions such as the Institute for the Study of Youth Sports (ISYS) at Michigan State University and 
the National Alliance for Youth Sports (NAYS). Two codes that have been widely adopted by youth 
sport programs across the United States are the Sport Parent Code of Conduct, provided by NAYS, 
and the Bill of Rights for Young Athletes, written by Dr. Vern Seefeldt and Dr. Rainer Martens and 
distributed by ISYS. The ISYS also offers graduate programs in Sport Coaching and Leadership 
through the Department of Kinesiology at Michigan State. 

The increasing reports of parents engaging in physically violent or verbally abusive behavior toward 
young athletes, coaches, officials, and opposing spectators have led many organizations to clearly 
define the role of parents in youth sport. For example, the American Youth Soccer Organization 
requires parents of players below the age of 8 to attend classes addressing sporting behavior. 
AYSO and similar youth sport organizations emphasize that parents must remain mindful of why 
kids participate in sport—in most cases, to have fun, according to a study of more than 25,000 
children from across the United States (Ewing & Seefeldt, 1989). The next most popular reasons 
were to learn new skills, be with friends, and experience the thrill of competition. Children did list 
winning as a reason for playing sport, but it was not one of the most popular reasons. Yet many 
parents and youth sport coaches erroneously believe that winning is the number one reason that 
children want to play. Parents who are obsessed with winning and losing place an unreasonable 
amount of pressure on their children and increase the likelihood that they will drop out of sport 
and physical activity altogether. 

These coaches also must introduce their athletes to oping strategies specific to a given opponent, and 
a concept of competition in which winning takes scouting and recruiting potential team members. 
on greater importance than it often does at the 
community level. Coaching in Colleges and Universities 

High school coaches are primarily involved Clearly, winning matters a great deal to all intercol- 

with students who are interested in athletics and legiate coaches; the pressure to win at this level, 
want to invest the time needed to become good especially at large universities, is much greater than 

athletes. They also have the opportunity to build that at the high school level. In fact, the enormous 

on the foundation laid by middle and junior high financial stakes of big-time college athletics can 
school coaches as they teach more complex tasks reduce it from an enjoyable, educational experi- 
and game strategies. This level is also marked by ence for everyone to a brutal exercise in survival. 
increased focus on competition and winning, which As anyone who reads the sports pages knows, the 
requires coaches to choose their teams wisely. They coach who doesn’t win his or her share of games 
also spend more time reviewing game film, devel- is soon fired. 



Chapter 14| Careers in Coaching and Sport Instruction 3383 

NeS Ch OSSe The quest of college coaches is to maximize 

College coaches aim to maximize the athletic poten the athletic potential of already-skilled athletes 
tial 

of already-skilled athletes, bu by building on the foundation established in high 
t they also have many 

othe school and fine-tuning each athlete’s ability in 
r responsibilities, including team and facility man- 

order to move them toward becoming members 
agement, budgeting, monitoring of academic progress, of the elite. Most college coaches have the advan- 
compliance issues, and recruiting. tage of working with a relatively small number of 

highly skilled athletes in well-equipped facilities. 

Long Shot: Probability of Competing in Athletics Beyond High School 

A recent NCAA survey (National Collegiate Athletic Association, 2019), summarized in the chart “Esti- 
mated Probability of Competing in College Athletics,” provides some sobering numbers for athletes 
who envision playing their chosen sport at the collegiate level. Although many high school athletes 
dream of continuing their careers at the next level, these data illustrate in real terms the low probability 
of fulfilling such dreams. The chart has been condensed to show statistics for the five most popular 
boys’ high school sports (in terms of participation) and five most popular girls’ sports. 

In a nutshell, the NCAA estimates that an athlete’s chance of competing in his or her chosen 
sport at the college level is very low (National Collegiate Athletic Association, 2020). For example, 
only 3.5 percent of high school senior male basketball players move on to play NCAA-sponsored 
basketball, and only 1.0 percent compete at the Division | level. On the women’s side, only 4.1 
percent of high school seniors go on to play NCAA basketball, and only 1.3 percent play at the 
Division | level. These figures do not include players competing in the National Association of 
Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA) or the National Junior College Athletic Association (NJCAA). 

Estimated Probability of Competing in College Athletics 

% HS to % HS to % HS to 
High school NCAA Overall % NCAA NCAA NCAA 

Sport participants participants HS to NCAA Division | Division II Division III 

Men 

Baseball 482,740 36,011 1.5% 2.2% 2.3% 2.9% 

Basketball 540,769 18,816 oy) i) 4.0 1.4 

Football 1,006,013 135142 (fas) 2.9 1-9 2.5 

Soccer 459,077 25,499 5.6 13 1.5 PRG 

Track & field 605,354 28,914 4.8 1.9 de a7, 

Women | ; ; 

Basketball 399,067 16,509 4.1 ie) q2 ‘ad 

Soccer 394,105 28,310 ae 2.4 1.9 2.9 

Softball 362,038 20,419 5:6 is) aye DP 

Track & field 488,267 30,326 6.2 2.8 AMS) 1.9 

Volleyball 452,808 17,780 She) a2 ila iS 

Sources: High school figures from the 2018-19 High School Athletics Participation Survey conducted by the National Fed- 

eration of State High School Associations; data from club teams not included. College numbers from the NCAA 2018-19 

Sports Sponsorship and Participation Rates Report. 

Reprinted from National Collegiate Athletic Association, Estimated Probability of Competing in College Athletics, (2020), http://www.ncaa.org/ 

about/resources/research/estimated-probability-competing-college-athletics. 



ma 334 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Given the popularity of basketball and football in secure an internship during their undergraduate 

the United States, these two sports tend to receive years or sign on as team manager and, with a great 

most of the resources in an athletic department. deal of effort, work their way up to an assistant 

Coaches of less prominent sports—such as cross coaching position. 
country, volleyball, softball, soccer, tennis, and Smaller colleges, most notably Division II and 

golf—usually have to make do with more modest Division III institutions, offer many opportunities 

budgets and resources. for coaches to get close to their players and to meet 
Like secondary-level coaches, college coaches and interact with them in many settings. Although 

have many responsibilities behind the scenes. the pay is generally not high, the rich quality of life 
To varying degrees, all coaches are involved in and reduced pressure to win offer compensation 
team, facility, and equipment management and in of a different sort. Coaching in larger institutions 
budgeting. At the college or university level, other where coaches’ jobs, and their assistants’ jobs, 
responsibilities also take on greater significance, depend on the team’s win-loss record usually 
such as talent scouting, recruiting, compliance, requires an enormous commitment in time and 
fund-raising, public relations, and athletic eligibility. energy, sacrifice of one’s family and social life, 
The degree of significance often depends on the and the fortitude to withstand the anxiety in years 
type of college in which the coach works. when the team fails to win many games. If you 

Employment opportunities at the college or happen to be one of the few perennially successful 
university level are not as plentiful as they are at coaches, however, coaching can be a lucrative and 
the secondary level. Because there are no official exciting career. 
national or state qualifications or requirements 
for coaching at the college or university level, Coaching in Professional Sport 
most colleges and universities look for coaching Who comes to mind when you think of professional 
applicants who have an established track record in coaches? The question may evoke images of Terry 
the relevant sport. Typically, establishing a name Francona and Joe Girardi (baseball), Greg Popovich 
requires college playing experience, coaching expe- and Steve Kerr (basketball), and Bill Belichick and 
rience, a history of successful seasons, and being Mike Tomlin (football). Although the number of 
known by many other coaches and administrators. professional sport coaches is small when compared 
Many Division I coaches began their careers at with the number of coaches at secondary schools 
the secondary level and moved through the lower and colleges, professional sport coaches typically 
divisions of college athletics. Others managed to have national prominence. 

Life as a Professional Sport Coach: Few Jobs, Less Security 

If your ultimate goal is to land a head coaching position at the professional level, be prepared for 
the most difficuljto b search imaginable. Consider the following: The five major professional sports 
in the United States have a total of only 149 head coaching positions (National Football League, 
32; Major League Baseball, 30; National Hockey League, 31; National Basketball Association, 
30; Major League Soccer, 26). Even if you are fortunate enough to land a pro head coaching job, 
your probability of keeping it for any extended amount of time is questionable. For example, from 
2012 through 2015, 22 NFL teams replaced their head coaches, and 11 did it twice! 

On the other hand, although the tenure of a professional sport coach may be brief, openings 
do occur on a regular basis. For example, there were six or more head coach openings for eight 
consecutive years (through the 2018 season) in the NFL. That said, it is also true that coaches 
who are already in the professional coaching community are often first in line to fill the most recent 
vacancy. Indeed, a sort of informal fraternity appears to exist among professional coaches, which 
is evidenced by the fact that several coaches in each of the major leagues have coached two or 
three teams in their league. Thus, they get fired or leave one job only to fill a similar position with 
another club. 



Chapter 14 |C areers in Coaching and Sport Instruction 385 

BRECON eee re Prospective coaches do need an established name 
A professional sport coach usually has many nonteach- in the chosen sport, and most acquire it by coach- 

ing and noncoaching duties, including ing successfully at the college or university level. 
 administration, 

recruitment, and Job security for the professional sport coach is 
media appearances. Continued 

tenuous at best. When you coach a team sport at 
employment depends heavily on producing a winning 

the professional level, you have entered an industry 
team. 

where success relies in large part on public sup- 
port. In professional sport, however, public support 

As with other professional coaching positions, generally waxes and wanes in direct relation to a 

facilitating athlete performance is central to the team’s win-loss record, as well as the whims of 

job of the professional sport coach. The position the media and the mass of uninformed spectators 

also includes elements of administration, athlete on social media. Just as the organization’s success 

recruitment, and public relations events and depends on producing a winning team, so does 

media appearances. Generally, the professional your coaching job. Many professional sport coaches 

sport coach has more nonteaching duties than thrive on this aspect of the job. They bask in the 

does the teaching professional discussed earlier. challenge of creating or maintaining a winning 

For example, some sports, such as football and tradition, and accomplishing that goal brings them 

hockey, require coaches to spend considerable great rewards and personal satisfaction. 

time participating in coaching meetings and 
reviewing game films. In addition, the win—loss Certification and Continuing 
record in such sports is more important than it Education of Coaches 
is in sports such as golf and tennis; in fact, the 

Coaching has been described as both an art and 
coach’s continued employment depends heavily on 

a science. Whatever the balance between the two 
team performance. Finally, the professional sport 

may be, coaching is a highly complex process of 
coach deals solely with elite athletes, whereas the 

applying knowledge about human performance, 
teaching pro often interacts with beginning and 

human development, motor learning, and exercise. 
intermediate athletes. 

It also involves high-order cognitive skills to apply 
Employment opportunities for the professional 

sport strategy and diagnose sport skills. All of 
sport coach are few and far between. The number 

these abilities are applied using sport psychology 
of professional sport teams is limited, but many 

techniques that enable the coach to communicate 
people are qualified to coach at the professional 

and motivate athletes. Thus, all successful coaches 
level. As in the college and university setting, 

have excellent interpersonal skills and the ability 
no particular national or state qualifications are 

to teach the techniques, tactics, and strategies of 
needed for coaching in the professional ranks. 

Hot Career Opportunity 
Sports Analytics 

A fast-growing career in sports involves the collection, analysis, and communication of performance 

data. In 2020, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that one of the top 10 fastest-growing career 

opportunities was in statistics. For kinesiology majors with skills in mathematics and statistics, 

a career in sports analytics could be a great opportunity. ZipRecruiter reported that the national 

average annual salary for jobs in sports analytics was $93,110 (ZipRecruiter, 2021). Sport man- 

agement, coaching, sport performance, and sport medicine staff all need data and data analysis 

for informed decision making. Sports analytics involves supervision of the collection, analysis, 

interpretation, and presentation of those data to these other sport professionals. The data and 

video that are collected (often with wearable sensors) are input into databases and statistically 

analyzed. This enables coaches to track training volumes, rest, and game strategy, and to balance 

performance with the likely risk of injury. Kinesiology majors with skills in data analysis and commu- 

nication with sport professionals can be strong candidates for these jobs in sports organizations. 



Ml 386 Introduction to Kinesiology 

a given sport based on motor learning principles. merly known as the National Youth Sports Coaches 

Coaches also need various other kinds of knowl- Association (NYSCA), and the Human Kinetics 

edge and skill. For instance, they must understand Coach Education Center. The United States Sports 

the fundamentals of exercise as it relates to training Academy also offers coaching courses and coach- 

and conditioning. In addition, managing any sport ing certificates that are available online, on-site, or 

enterprise entails planning, organizing, staffing, through correspondence. Most of these programs 

leading others and monitoring progress toward require a modest tuition fee, although a few of the 
team goals, and understanding the legal liability introductory courses are free. Various sport-specific 

and risk factors associated with making decisions. certification agencies (e.g., U.S. Soccer) also offer 
Furthermore, in the last two decades, coaches have options for equipping youth sport coaches with 
taken on concerns related to first aid and drug edu- the skills and knowledge required for successful 
cation. Moreover, as sports medicine and athletic coaching. 
training have become more established as fields, 
the coach’s role has expanded to include injury pre- Education and Certification of Middle 

vention and facilitation of emergency care. When and High School Coaches 
injuries occur, the coach should be knowledgeable Your department may offer a curriculum—usually 
enough to help trained medical personnel. as a minor rather than a major—to prepare you for 

coaching. However, the United States has yet to 
Certification of Youth Sport Coaches establish consistent research, journals, or curricu- 
Certification is becoming increasingly important as lums on coaching in the way that some countries 
the problems afflicting youth sport become more have done in Europe and Asia. In the United States, 
serious. Never before has there been such an obvi- most regional school districts and local coaching 
ous need for highly qualified coaches who operate societies sponsor continuing education programs 
on the basis of a sound coaching philosophy. The and annual clinics for coaches at the middle school, 
coaches for most youth sport teams are parents high school, and college levels. In some states, these 
and others who volunteer to serve. The kinesiology clinics attract thousands of coaches and feature 
graduate is more likely to be not a coach but the presentations by some of the most popular college 
program organizer and administrator. As a result, and professional coaches. The National Federation 
you should recognize the value of certification for of High School Associations (NFHS) also offers more 
your coaches. A number of certification programs than 70 online coaching courses and certifications 
are available for youth sport coaches. Excellent at NFHSLearn.com. Some coaches, eager to learn 
educational programs for coaches are offered by more about the scientific side of coaching, enroll in 
the National Alliance for Youth Sports (NAYS), for- master’s degree programs that offer a concentration 

U.S. Soccer National Coaching Certification Program 

Millions of boys and girls under the age of 19 play organized soccer in the United States, which 
creates a huge demand for coaches at all levels. In an effort to educate coaches and set a stan- 
dard for coaching young soccer players, U.S. Soccer has instituted a national coaching certification 
program that offers both state and national coaching licenses for various levels of expertise and 
experience. Certification begins at the Grassroots level with courses (4v4, 7v7, 9v9, and 11v11) 
that focus on elementary principles of coaching and prepare coaches for the 36-hour State D 
License course. National A, B, and C courses consist of 7 days of instruction and 2 days of exten- 
sive oral, written, and practical examinations. 

U.S. Soccer also offers the National Youth License. This coaching license provides youth 
coaches, club coaching directors, physical education teachers, and soccer administrators with the 
knowledge to successfully structure optimal soccer environments for children aged 4 to 12. The 
National Youth License course explores the role of the coach as a facilitator; the physical, mental, 
and emotional needs and capabilities of 4- to 12-year-old players; lessons from developmental 
psychology; and the art of teaching. To facilitate analysis of their performance, candidates are 
video-recorded during live training sessions. 



Chapter 14| Careers in Coaching and Sport Instruction 337 i 

in coaching or a related kinesiology subdiscipline. The primary objective of the National Diploma 
For instance, coaches in a technique-centric sport is to educate the coach about the needs of soccer 
such as gymnastics might benefit from an advanced players and to provide an organized methodology 
degree in biomechanics, whereas those in a train- for coaching those needs. The central theme of the 
ing-centric sport such as running might benefit from course is basic technical and tactical knowledge 
a master’s degree in exercise physiology. in a 7v7 model. The course includes sessions on 

the teaching process, psychological skills train- 
ing, and laws of the game. The National Diploma 

CBU Dee consists of 45 hours of instruction and 6 hours of 
The Human Kinetics Coach Education Center and the testing and evaluation. The Advanced Diploma is 
Coaching Association of Canada offer certification a 45-hour course for coaches with at least 10 years 

programs for community and scholastic coaches of experience. The Premier Diploma is a 45-hour 

covering sport psychology, sport physiology, coaching course that examines different systems of play, 

philosophy, sport pedagogy, sport management, sport nutrition, sporting behavior, ethics, and personal 
and professional development. To enroll for the 

first aid, and drug education. 
Premier Diploma, a candidate must have passed the 
Advanced Diploma with a grade of “distinguished 

Coaching education experiences are available pass.” These courses are very informative; they can 

through various national coaching associations. also be quite costly. The United Soccer Coaches 

One good example is the certification program organization also offers an online master’s degree 

provided by United Soccer Coaches (formerly in soccer coaching through the College of Educa- 

known as the National Soccer Coaches Association tion at Ohio University. At this writing it may be the 

of America), which sponsors a coaching academy only sport-specific graduate program in the United 

that offers residential and nonresidential courses. States, although some countries offer a variety of 

The residential academy offers course work toward university degrees in specific sports. 

National, Advanced, and Premier Diplomas. 

United Soccer Coaches Nonresidential Coaching Programs 

United Soccer Coaches offers a variety of coaching courses designed to accommodate all levels 
of coaching experience, ranging from youth coaches through professional team managers. The 
introductory Coaching Development Courses are nonresidential and can be offered at local soccer 
clubs throughout the country. These courses are designed primarily for youth soccer coaches and 
focus on player development through small-sided games. Three courses are offered based on the 
age and ability of players being coached. 

>» Coaching 4v4 Diploma: This 3-hour, in-person course is designed for coaches working with 
players aged 8 or under. The curriculum is packed with age-appropriate training activities 
based on a 4v4 game structure. The time commitment for this diploma is only 3 hours, and 
no testing is required. 

» Coaching 7v7/9v9 Diploma: This 9-hour, in-person curriculum focuses on coaching players 
aged 9 to 12. Course content addresses player development, principles of play, technique, 

and tactics with small-sided games. No testing is required. 

> Coaching 11v11 Diploma: This curriculum is designed for intermediate coaches who work with 

players aged 13 and older. Course topics include the modern numbering system of players, 

formations and systems of play, player competencies, and defensive and offensive tactics. 

This diploma requires a 12-hour commitment but no testing. 

The United Soccer Coaches Educational Department also offers e-learning for those coaches 

who wish to learn at their own pace in the comfort of their own homes. Topics such as 11v11 

formations, systems of play, and the benefit of small-sided training games are covered through 

online modules. 



BH 388 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Education and Certification of College athletic administration once the fire to continue 

coaching has been extinguished. In fact, a number 
and Professional Coaches 

of prominent football and basketball coaches have 
Although coaching at the high school level may moved to administration later in their careers. The 
require preparation in kinesiology, coaching posi- experiences gained while serving, in effect, as the 
tions at the highest levels (college and university CEO of a major college sport can be beneficial in 
or professional teams) may require little in the way 

the administrative role as well. 
of formal academic preparation. Duke basketball 
coach Mike Krzyzewski, for example, holds a BA 
from the U.S. Military Academy; former University Ethics and Coaching 
of Maryland basketball coach Gary Williams earned In the recent past, a prominent coach at a major 
a BS in business; and New England Patriots coach university was fired for allegedly knowing that play- 
Bill Belichick holds a bachelor’s degree in econom- ers had violated NCAA rules but not reporting the 
ics. None of these very successful coaches availed violations to his superiors. In another celebrated 
themselves of a formal education in kinesiology. case, a college basketball coach was terminated 
(In a side note, the academic credentials of some of for allegedly lying to NCAA investigators during a 
our most illustrious college coaches remain buried probe of recruiting violations. The issues at Penn 
in university personnel files, unavailable for public State University with former football assistant 
inspection—a bit odd for institutions that suppos- coach Jerry Sandusky are well documented. Such 
edly take academic qualifications very seriously.) ethical issues are not limited to the highest levels 

Thus, if your goal is to coach football or basket- of amateur sport. Every year, a number of middle 
ball at a very high level in the United States, you are school and high school coaches are also fired for 
likely to benefit less from obtaining highly polished inappropriate conduct ranging from unethical 
academic credentials than from getting your foot in relationships with students to psychological or 
the door to the coaching establishment at a fairly physical abuses of the athletes for whom they are 
young age and showing that you can produce win- responsible. 
ning teams. Experience as a head coach in a major The ethics of coaches’ conduct are now an 
college sport can also set the stage for a career in important consideration at all levels of coaching. 

NAYS Code of Ethics 

| hereby pledge to live up to my certification as a NAYS Coach by following the NAYS Coaches’ 
Code of Ethics: 

> I will place the emotional and physical well-being of my players ahead of a personal desire 
to win. 

> Iwill treat each player as an individual, remembering the large range of emotional and physical 
development for the same age group. 

| will do my best to provide a safe playing situation for my players. 

| promise to review and practice basic first aid principles needed to treat injuries of my players. 

| will do my best to organize practices that are fun and challenging for all my players. 

| will lead by example in demonstrating fair play and sporting behavior to all my players. 
| will not cheat or engage in any form of unethical behavior that violates league rules. 

NEANAE,A   | will provide a sports environment for my team that is free of drugs, tobacco, and alcohol, 
and | will refrain from their use at all youth sports events. 

» | will be knowledgeable in the rules of each sport that | coach, and | will teach these rule 
to my players. 

> | will use those coaching techniques appropriate for all of the skills that | teach. 
> | will remember that | am a youth sports coach, and that the game is for children and not 

adults. 

Reprinted by permission from the National Alliance for Youth Sports (NAYS), https://www.nays.org/coaches/training/code-of-ethics/ 



Chapter 14| Careers in Coaching and Sport Instruction 339 

Whether it involves encouraging players to cheat, One emerging job market in U.S. sport is that 
pressuring other faculty members to give passing of statistical analyst. According to the U.S. Bureau 
grades to a star player, or performing antics during of Labor Statistics (2015), career opportunities for 
a game that incite players and spectators against stats analysts in competitive sport will increase 
officials, unethical behavior should have no part steadily over the next decade. Sport stats analysts 
in the professional’s life. To ensure that athletics collect data and then create mathematical models to 
are integrated with the educational program and evaluate players and teams in order to project per- 
that coaches act with their athletes’ welfare in formance. They use statistical models to analyze the 
mind at all times, the National Alliance for Youth data and simulate how various changes in the game 
Sports (NAYS) has promulgated a code of ethics might affect their chances of success. For example, 
for coaches (see sidebar). If you plan to coach ina professional baseball teams commonly use infield 
middle school or high school, memorize this code. shifts with certain hitters based on the frequency 

In the final analysis, ethical conduct flows from with which the batter hits the ball to specific areas 
a sound personal philosophy. As addressed in of the field. The same approach can be applied to 
chapter 3, it is vital for professionals to have a solid pitch selection for a certain hitter, depending on a 
base of values on which to make ethical decisions statistical analysis of which pitches the player hits 
that affect the lives of those for whom they work. best or worst. This approach was popularized by 
Without developing such a base and applying it Michael Lewis’ book Moneyball, which was turned 
to coaching, you stand a good chance of making into a 2011 movie by the same name. The film was 
decisions by the seat of your pants rather than from based on the true story of how the Oakland Athlet- 
the larger perspective of the values that you hold ics, a low-budget Major League Baseball (MLB) team, 
sacred. Have you developed a personal philosophy outsmarted and out-performed larger, more finan- 
that can guide you in making decisions as a coach? cially solvent teams through the use of analytics. 

Thus, a kinesiology major with a keen interest 
in sport and statistics may find a niche in the 

Trends and Opportunities arena of highly competitive sport. Kinesiology has 

in Coaching and Sport Instruction always had research on sport stats, or analytics, 
but historically this work has been most appreci- 

The outlook for securing a coaching job is some- ated and most used in the United Kingdom and 
what promising. According to the U.S. Bureau of Australia. In contrast, it is a recent development in 
Labor Statistics (2019), employment of coaches is the United States. Therefore, kinesiology graduates 
projected to grow 11 percent from 2018 to 2028, who are interested in this career need to leverage 
which is faster than the average for all occupa- the available research from throughout the world 
tions. Increasing participation in high school and and develop their mathematical skills in order to 
college sports will boost demand for coaches and compete with graduates who hold any of various 
scouts. In addition, coaching was listed third in the degrees in business, computing, or math. 
2020 ranking of best education jobs by U.S. News 
& World Report (“Sports coach,” 2020), although 
the salaries for many positions remain fairly low. Advice for Coaching 
Specifically, the median annual salary for sport and Sport Instruction Students 
coaches, taking into account all levels, was $34,840 
in 2019, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor The first piece of advice that any coach or sport 
Statistics (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2019). instructor will give to students who want to coach 
Elementary and secondary schools are the largest is to make sure that they are suited for a career in 
employers of sport coaches. Major spectator sports coaching. Take a moment to review the questions 

(college and professional football and basketball) listed in the sidebar titled Are You Suited for a 

provide the best compensation; they are also by Career in Sport Instruction or Coaching? If, after 

far the most difficult jobs to get and retain due to going through this exercise, you believe that you are 

the intense competition for positions. suited for a career in this area, then consider this 

The job outlook is less clear for sport instructors second piece of advice: Carefully lay out a plan for 

and coaches at commercial sport academies. One developing a career in coaching. This process entails 

might logically expect, however, that as long as the following four steps: doing appropriate academic 

public interest in sport remains high, job opportu- work, gaining coaching experience, staying current 

nities in these areas will remain available. in the field, and building a coaching network. 



fe 390 Introduction to Kinesiology 

The first step is to take coaching courses in EeO S ee 
your department or at neighboring colleges and Successful coaching requires skills that go beyond sci- 
universities. If your primary program of studies will entific knowledge. Effective teachers and coaches also 
accommodate a coaching minor, arrange to do it. 

develop communication, leadership, and organization 
The second step is to gain coaching experience, 

skills that enable them to develop rapport with their 
which is a very important element in the process 
of preparing for a career in coaching. On-the-job participants and foster a sense of community. 

learning, particularly at the collegiate and profes- 
sional levels, is often considered more important The third step toward. developing a career in 
than coaching courses or certification licenses. coaching is to stay up to date on the latest trends 
Opportunities for coaching internships abound and tactics in your chosen sport. As a coach, you 
in most communities. Explore opportunities to are regarded as an expert in your sport. To live up 
become a volunteer coach in a local youth sport to that standard, attend clinics, watch webinars, and 
organization; sport associations and recreation become a voracious reader of materials related to 
departments are always looking for volunteer 

the sport you wish to coach. Read books, articles, 
coaches. You probably will start out as an assis- 

and newsletters on coaching; many of these mate- 
tant coach, so be patient—other opportunities will 

rials are available from national or local coaching 
develop. If you have a special interest in swimming, 

associations for your sport of interest. Attend con- 
tennis, or martial arts, inquire about volunteer 

ferences and other events for coaching education 
opportunities at local clubs or schools. If golf is 

in your sport. Earn coaching licenses and certifi- 
your passion, make inquiries at local country clubs 

cations. Selected teaching and coaching resources 
or golf courses. Opportunities to gain experience 

are listed at the end of this chapter, along with 
may also be available in athletic programs in local 

organizations and associations that can help you 
school districts. Many coaches welcome offers of 

develop as a coach. With some diligent website 
help from coaches-in-training. Also check with 

navigation (beginning with the sport that interests 
private schools in your area; these schools often 

you), you will find many more organizations. 
fill coaching positions with college students who 

The fourth step is to begin, while you are still an 
are preparing for coaching careers. 

undergraduate student, building a network of active 

Are You Suited for a Career in Sport Instruction or Coaching? 

If you are considering a career in coaching or sport instruction, ask yourself which setting appeals 
to you most. Will you enjoy working in a community, commercial, or institutional setting? Are 
you attracted to working with underserved youth in community youth development programs or 
with skilled or budding athletes in specialized sport programs? Do you enjoy being “on the job” 
on weekends, when most games are played and most recruiting takes place? Do you have an 
entrepreneurial spirit that will support a venture as an independent sport instructor or teaching 
professional? Are you comfortable marketing yourself and your expertise? 

Consider also whether you like dealing with people as much as you like participating in your 
favorite sport. Are you an effective communicator? Do you have what it takes to be a leader? Do 
you like to plan and organize activities? Do you like to engage in strategy? Are you organized? 
How committed are you to the sport you want to coach and to the young people who play it? Do 
you have good judgment? Will you be happy experiencing both your successes and your failures 
in the public eye? Will it bother you to have others evaluate your performance, second-guess you, 
and criticize you? Do you have what it takes to look beyond the win-loss record and focus on the 
growth and development experienced by the athletes who play for you? Are you willing to experience 
the emotional ups and downs that typically characterize a career in coaching? 

Answer these questions truthfully and you will get a better idea of whether you are emotionally 
and intellectually suited for a career in sport instruction, coaching, or both. 



Chapter 14| Careers in Coaching and Sport Instruction 

coaches. You will find no quicker way of joining the together requires a person to be organized and to 
fraternity of the coaching ranks than by cultivating have sound time management skills. 
contacts who can serve as mentors. Do not under- Do you have good leadership skills? Coaching 
estimate the importance of being connected in the effectiveness also hinges largely on your ability to 
coaching community; networking is essential. inspire athletes to higher levels of performance. 

As you progress through the steps to becoming This undertaking requires leadership. Hundreds of 
a career coach, it is important to periodically take books on leadership are on the market, including 
stock of your personal abilities and develop those many written by business executives and successful 
areas in which you detect weaknesses. For example, coaches. Begin a course of reading that will help 
coaching success depends a great deal on commu- you develop effective leadership skills. 
nication. A course in communication skills can help, Examining your own style of communication, 
but it cannot take the place of experience. Teachers organization, and leadership will enable you to 
and coaches can be highly knowledgeable about identify the weak spots and develop a plan for 
communication principles and yet fail to be effec- remediation. Simply put, the more you do, the more 
tive communicators. Similarly, they may know the you learn. Take advantage of these opportunities to 
principles of leadership but not be effective leaders. enhance your knowledge and skills, thus making 
Being a successful teacher or coach requires that yourself a more competent and effective teacher 
you have not only knowledge but also the skill or coach when you enter the profession. 
to share that knowledge in a way that will cause 
people to listen and respond. 

The greatest coaches are not necessarily those Wrap-Up 
who were the greatest athletes. Part of the reason This chapter presents basic information about the 
this is true may lie in the fact that for great athletes, coaching and sport instruction professions. It also 
sport came easily to them, and they never devel- provides an overview of careers in teaching and 
oped the skills they needed to convey the reasons coaching, as well as the work settings in which these 
for their success to less talented athletes. On the careers take place. Both professions involve instruc- 
other hand, athletes with less natural ability may tion and offer opportunities to serve a wide range of 
have had to study the sport in greater detail and people across many ages and ability levels. In fact, 
depth in order to perform at competitive levels. few professions offer such a wide array of popula- 
They have experienced adversity in sport, can tions to serve—from youth sport coach to strength 
understand the challenges confronting the average coach at various levels to Olympic or professional 
athlete, and can therefore relate and communicate coach. A wide variety of opportunities are available 
more effectively with the group as a whole. not only to capitalize on personal interest but also to 

Successful coaching also puts a premium on promote physical activity programs and serve society. 
organizational skills because key components of Like athletes, most coaches are not likely to achieve 
the job include detailed planning of in-season the great wealth of a few fortunate coaches. Ask 
practice sessions, off-season training and condition- yourself the following question: Do you enjoy sport 
ing programs, and game preparation. Remember, competition and want to make a positive difference in 
too, that for most middle school and high school someone’s life? If the answer is yes, then a career in 
coaches, and for some college coaches, coaching sport instruction and coaching may be right for you. 
is only one of the job responsibilities. Fitting it all 

_MORE INFORMATION ON CAREERS IN COACHING AND SPORT INSTRUCTION 

Organizations 

Amateur Athletic Union 

American Baseball Coaches Association 

American Swimming Coaches Association 

Boys & Girls Clubs of America 

Canadian Swimming Coaches and Teachers Association 

Coaching Association of Canada 



Ml 392 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Collegiate Strength and Conditioning Coaches Association 

Institute for the Study of Youth Sports 

Joy of Sports Foundation 

National Association for Coaching Equity and Development 

National Association for the Education of Young Children 

National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics 

National Collegiate Athletic Association 

National Federation of State High School Associations 

National Junior College Athletic Association 

National Strength and Conditioning Association 

SHAPE America 

United Soccer Coaches 

United States Olympic Committee 

Women’s Sports Foundation 

YMCA of the USA 

YWCA of the USA 

Journals 
Applied Research in Coaching and Athletics Annual 

Coaching: An International Journal of Theory, Research, and Practice 

International Journal of Sport Sciences 

Journal for the Study of Sports and Athletes in Education 

Journal of Intercollegiate Sport 

Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport 

Journal of Sports Sciences 

International Journal of Performance Analysis in Sport 

International Sport Coaching Journal 

Research Journal of Sport Sciences 

Soccer Journal (United Soccer Coaches) 

Sport Journal 

“REVIEW QUESTIONS: sos «es ee eee 
1. What distinguishes sport instruction from sport coaching? 

2. Describe the differences and similarities between the act of instruction and the act of 
coaching. 

3. Contrast the professions and subcultures of coaching and those of sport instruction. 

4. Outline the variety of work settings for coaches and sport instructors. 

5. List the three professions in coaching and sport instruction that are most appealing to you. 
Examine and discuss the educational requirements and qualifications for these careers. 

6. Consider two professions from this chapter—one in sport instruction and one in coaching. 
Describe the duties and responsibilities for each, including their primary purposes. 

A | KProp eC| » > Go to HKPropel to complete the activities for this chapter. 



Careers in Sport 
Management 



~ Consider the «fo llowing scenarios representing cha 
confront. 

2 } An account executive fora plesecurl sport foe toons a Bites the off-season by : 

selling season tickets, group ticket packages, and promotional packages to area businesses a 

and individuals. Revenue generated by these sales serves as the lifeblood of the eas Se 

ensuring a successful upcoming. season regardless of team performance. ed 

» Staff members and interns in a college athletic department’s communication office aotiate 

social media channels in support of a student-athlete’ s candidacy for a prestigious national 

award. By motivating the department's fan base and alumni to vote in an online poll, they 

ave the ees aD etter chance of being selected. 

1 or t-specific international governing body plans and oversees 
a rangea e iearianen round the world each year. bsK e! Oe 
coordinating the efforts of the event staff ateach | eee 
tournament, sae with site and venue issues, 

Students with an interest in sport and physical Research charted the growth in number of those 
activity may find a career in sport management working in this industry from slightly over 450,000 
appealing. Whether the job involves the use of workers in 2015 to almost 534,000 workers in 2019. 
marketing, program management, financial, or Because of the many job opportunities in sport 
other administrative skills, a managerial position management, it is one of the spheres of profes- 
in sport usually proves to be both challenging and sional practice centered on physical activity. 
rewarding. Although competition for jobs is often The career opportunities in sport management 
fierce, many career options are available, and the are many, varied, and expandinJgo.bs  exist in pro- 
field continues to grow. fessional sport, amateur sport, sport participation, 

sporting goods, and support services. Graduates 
with a well-rounded degree can choose from a 
variety of roles, ranging from event management 

The thriving sport management industry offers many to human resource management to marketing 

viable options to students looking fora :c areer in sport. management. We hope this chapter helps you 
decide whether a career in sport management is 
right for you. 

Plunkett Research (n.d.-a) estimated the size of 
the sport industry to have grown from over $388 
billion in 2008 to almost $540 billion in 2018 with What Is Sport Management? 
major professional leagues and teams accounting 

The sport industry comprises several distinct sec- 
for over $37 billion. Their analysis included factors 

tors, and it is clearly big business. Sport manage- 
such as ticket sales, licensed products, sport video 

ment scholars have defined the term sport industry 
games, sporting goods, and facilities income. Using 

in a number of ways (Plunkett Research, n.d.-b), 
statistics from the U.S. Bureau of Labor, Plunkett 

Mg 304 



Chapter 15| Careers in Sport Management 

which accounts for the variation in estimates of its as recreation, leisure, sport tourism, and business. 
size. The analysis conducted by Plunkett Research Although similarities exist between these areas, so 
included recreation, fitness, and sport in educa- do distinctions. 
tional settings, along with sport entertainment and Recreation or leisure may involve physical 
other sectors of the industry. activity that results in personal enjoyment, excite- 

Sport management is “the study and prac- ment, and fulfillment. One form of recreation is, of 
tice of all people, activities, businesses, . . . [and] course, sport (Hurd & Anderson, 2011). Students 
organizations involved in producing, facilitating, in recreation programs often prepare for careers in 
promoting, or organizing any sport-related busi- corporate fitness, nonprofit recreation, military rec- 
ness or product” (Pitts & Stotlar, 2007, p. 4). The reation, parks and recreation, campus intramurals, 
sport management sphere of professional practice and other forms of leisure services. Sport manage- 
centered on physical activity can intersect with ment students may have similar career interests, 
career Opportunities in three of the other spheres: as is detailed in the later section of this chapter 
health and fitness, coaching and sport education, titled Sport Participation. Graduates of sport man- 
and therapeutic exercise. agement programs do sometimes land jobs with 

Physical activity professionals are expert manip- parks and recreation departments, nonprofit fitness 
ulators of physical activity experiences. Their providers, and campus recreation programs. 
expertise lies in manipulating physical activity Sport tourism involves people whose primary 
experiences in order to improve performance motivation in traveling outside of their communities 
and health. They may serve as personal trainers, is to participate in physical activity, watch sport 
teachers, athletic trainers, or coaches. Many sport events, or visit sport attractions—for example, a 
management professions relate indirectly to the hall of fame (Gibson & Fairley, 2014). Students in 
manipulation of physical activity itself (e.g., fitness sport tourism programs often prepare for careers 
center administration), and others focus on manip- as special event managers, travel coordinators, and 
ulating elements that support spectatorship (e.g., sport commission administrators. Here again, sport 
promotion, marketing, public relations) in order to management students may pursue similar career 
maximize customer satisfaction. Generally, these paths and land jobs in sport tourism. 
professionals provide support services, facilities, What distinctions exist between these areas of 
and other amenities to make physical activity and study? It is difficult to define fixed differences, 
spectatorship possible. A sport manager may be given the diverse ways in which sport manage- 
employed as one of the following examples of a ment, recreation and leisure programs, and sport 
larger variety of positions: tourism programs are structured. Still, we can say 

that recreation programs commonly offer more 
¢ Marketing coordinator for a speedway (see 

depth in terms of specific forms of recreational 
the section titled Sport Entertainment) 

programming and related considerations. Sport 
¢ Program coordinator for a YMCA (see Sport tourism programs address how to develop and 

Participation) manage sport-related travel opportunities and how 
¢ General manager for a golf course (see Sport to gauge the effects of such initiatives. Sport man- 

Participation) agement programs, in contrast, tend to focus on 

¢ Athletic director for a high school (see Sport the sport-specific application of business principles 
such as management and marketing in varied for- 

Entertainment) 
profit and nonprofit settings. 

¢ Development officer for a college or univer- 
Although the academic study of sport manage- 

sity athletic department (see Sport Enter- 
ment is relatively new, management in the sport 

tainment) industry has a long history. In the early 1800s, 
e Event manager for a marathon or other sport people planned how to promote boxing and bil- 

event (see Sport Services) liards, and in the mid-1800s, those responsible 

¢ Manager of a golf equipment retail store (see for the promotion of baseball games scrutinized 

Sporting Goods) the placement of baseball fields outside of urban 
areas. The 1880s and subsequent years brought 

Given the overlap between sport management about distribution issues that required the input of 
and other spheres of professional practice, students 

sport managers. During the 1890s, sporting goods 
interested in building a career as a sport manager manufacturers commonly hired professional adver- 
sometimes find themselves competing for jobs with 

tising agencies (Fielding & Miller, 1996). By 1920, 
students who have studied in related areas, such 



Mm 396 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Sport Management Versus Recreation and Leisure Studies 

The following comparison of course descriptions illustrates the distinctions between recreation, 

sport tourism, and sport management. The first set of courses is part of an undergraduate cur- 

riculum in the recreation, park, and leisure studies program at the University of Minnesota. The 

second set is drawn from the tourism and hospitality management specialization within the tourism, 

recreation, and sport management department at the University of Florida. The third set comes 

from the sport management program at Wichita State University. 

Selected Courses in Recreation, Park, and Leisure Studies (University of Minnesota) 

> Orientation to Leisure and Recreation: Opportunities to explore field of recreation and the 

role it plays in society and human development. Visit recreation facilities representing public, 

quasi-public, and for-profit agencies. Overview of recreation field and foundation for continuing 

on to more advanced recreation courses. 

» Recreation Programming: Methods, skills, and materials needed for planning, developing, 
implementing, and evaluating professional recreation programs for diverse populations in 
various settings. 

>» Leisure and Human Development: Explore issues associated with roles of leisure throughout 
life span. Principles and procedures for designing programs, services, and facilities relative 
to individual values, attitudes, identity, culture, age, and gender. 

Selected Courses in Tourism, Hospitality and Event Management in the Department of Tourism, 
Hospitality, and Event Management (University of Florida) 

» Principles of Travel and Tourism: Overview of the travel and tourism industry; coverage of 
historical, behavioral, societal, and business aspects of travel and tourism. 

>» Management and Supervision of Leisure Facilities and Personnel: The management process 
as it relates to planning and operation of leisure service facilities. Subjects include traditional 
and contemporary management theory, the management process, legal and financial aspects, 
risk management, and contemporary issues in leisure services management. Facility topics 
include feasibility studies and design issues. 

» Hospitality Revenue Management: Provides an applied understanding of the strategies and 
tactics used in hospitality revenue management. Addresses fundamental principles and 
concepts of revenue management, including capacity management, duration control, demand 
and revenue forecasting, discounting, overbooking practices, displacement analysis, rate 
management, and sales mix analysis. 

Selected Courses in Sport Management (Wichita State University) 

» Legal Aspects of Sport: Provides students with the knowledge, understanding, and application 
of how the following legal issues influence the sport industry. Specific content addressed 
includes: the legal system, statutory law, risk management, tort law (negligence and inten- 
tional torts), contracts, and employment-related issues within the sport industry. A primary 
objective is to enhance the decision-making and problem-solving ability of each student 
regarding legal issues in sport and physical activity. 

>» Human Resource Management in Sport: Introduction to the administration of sport in 
public schools, institutions of higher education, community recreation, and commercial and 
professional sport organizations. Students learn about the various components of sport 
administration and how to apply managerial decision making and leadership theories in an 
environment of complexity and diversity. 

> Technology in Sport Management: Students gain a greater appreciation for the applications 
of current technology in the area of sport management, including but not limited to: the fun- 
damentals of computers and their use, the application of commercial software to the sport 
management setting, the ethical issues sport managers face in using computers to conduct 
research, and work with various social media platforms in sport settings. 

Data from University of Minnesota (2020); University of Florida (2020); Wichita State University (2020). 



Chapter 15|Careers in Sport Management 397 

the structure of organizations in the sport industry 
was w Settings for Sport Management 

ell established: management, marketing, 
legal issues and regulations, financial structure, The sport industry can be divided into three seg- 
and distribution. ments: sport entertainment, sport participation, 

and support services. All three segments share 
functional roles within the industry (see figure 

AC ee 15.1). For instance, management and marketing 
The sport industry has grown considerably since the are required by both professional sport franchises 

1800s. This blossoming has been caused in part by and nonprofit sport organizations. Likewise, 

tec financial and legal services are required by both 
hnological developments, increased discretionary 

nonprofit organizations like the YMCA and for- 
money and time, evolving demographics, consumer 

profit organizations such as an ice-skating arena. 
needs, and other societal influences. 

In fact, as illustrated later in this chapter, a great 

Sport management industry settings 

Entertainment 

¢ MLB, NFL, NBA, NHL Sporting goods ¢ Golf courses and clubs 
¢ Motor sports (e.g., ¢ Manufacturing e Bowling alleys 
NASCAR) ¢ Distribution e Fitness centers 

¢ Minor league e Retail outlets ¢ Ice-skating rinks 
organizations e Parks and recreation 

¢ College athletics Sport services e YMCAs, YWCAs 
¢ High school athletics ¢ Event management ¢ Hospital fitness 
¢ Olympics-related events e Insurance ¢ Boys and Girls Clubs 

¢ Communication and 
information 

Event management Human resource Marketing management 
¢ Sponsorship management ¢ Product development 
¢ Security ¢ Hiring, training ¢ Promotion 

e Labor relations 
LETS ATID SIS ISO T SIE ENCLS 

Financial management Legal management Public relations 
e Accounting e Risk management management 
¢ Budgeting ¢ Compliance ¢ Media relations 

Venue manage ment 
¢ Scheduling 
e Facilities and equipment 

GeUEER! Settings in the sport management industry, a long with common functional roles in each segment. 

Based on Meek (1997). 



Wi 398 Introduction to Kinesiology 

deal of interdependence exists between the sport entertainment organization provides career oppor- 

industry segments. Furthermore, the task listings tunities in the following areas: 
for the functional areas detailed in figure 15.1 are 

e Event management 
not exhaustive. Human resource management, for 
example, could also include motivating, compen- ¢ Financial management 

sating, retaining, and evaluating. ¢ Human resource management 

* Legal management 

« Marketing management 
SREY PON tse ie Se ee 

¢ Public relations management 
Sport managers are more involved in the activities and 
job responsibilities surrounding an event than they are e Venue management 

in the sport or activity itself. These characteristics of professional sport are 
mirrored in many ways by the amateur sport 
entertainment sector. As with professional sport, 

The number of tasks handled in-house or out- 
the entertainment alternatives are vast and the 

sourced varies both across the industry and within 
career opportunities abundant in settings such 

organizations. Similarly, industry segments differ in 
as Olympics-related events and college athletics. 

how each function is allocated among employees. 
Career opportunities in this industry segment often 

Larger sport organizations often assign specialized 
include the following: 

responsibilities to staff members based on their 
areas of expertise. In contrast, people in smaller * Development 
organizations are likely to be responsible for a ¢ Public relations 
variety of job functions. 

¢ Marketing 

¢ Operations 
Sport Entertainment 

¢ Ticket sales 
The proliferation of sport entertainment oppor- 

¢ Compliance 
tunities has created an abundance of jobs. At the 
professional level, fans are entertained by a mul- e Student services 

titude of major and minor league teams, as well e¢ Facilities 
as motorsports, golf, tennis, and mixed martial 
arts events. The options are increased further by Sport Participation 
expansion teams, new professional leagues, and the 
professionalization of alternative sports (e.g., action Whereas managers in the entertainment sector 

sports). Each entertainment production (i.e., game or enable consumers to enjoy the sport performances 

event) represents a tremendous undertaking, com- of others, those in the participation sector provide 

bining the skills, competencies, and knowledge of opportunities for customers to engage in sport 

many people working in separate functional areas. activities themselves. The sport participation sector 

As indicated in figure 15.1, each professional sport includes both for-profit and nonprofit organizations. 

Examining Your Interactions With Sport 

To appreciate the prevalence and popularity of sport, you need only examine your own interactions 
with sport and leisure during a typical day. Sport is an integral part of many peoples’ lives, and 
that is good news for sport managers because consumer demand for sport and leisure activities 
results in job opportunities for sport management students. 

Think about your average week. How much time do you spend watching sport programming 
on television? How much time do you spend reading about sports online, discussing it on social 
media platforms, or participating in a fantasy sport? How much time do you spend engaging in 
Sport activities, whether it be golfing, cycling, or even esports? How much money do you spend 
on apparel featuring team logos or brand marks of sporting goods companies? How much time 
do you spend talking about sports? 



Chapter 15 |C areers in Sport Management 399 

Considering Sport Entertainment Management 

Think about the last time you attended a professional or amateur sport event or watched one on 
television. Identify as many as you can of the peripheral activities or extended elements, such 
as concessions, associated with the main event or game. With this context in mind, are you 
interested in managing events or venues? If so, begin developing your skills in organization, time 
management, leadership, and communication—all of which are necessary for a successful career 
in sport entertainment management. 

For-Profit Participation Segment 
For-profit sport participation organizations economic contributions and outlook (Krnjaic, 
include health and fitness clubs, bowling alleys, 2020). Participation opportunities for both clients 
roller-skating rinks, miniature golf courses, golf and fans decreased. Deloitte (2020b), however, 

courses, ice-skating rinks, sport parks, and more. noted three key strategies or opportunities sport 

The increasing presence of such organizations is or physical activity organizations should address 
exemplified by the growth in the number of health in order to recover from the pandemic’s impact. 
and fitness clubs over the last decade, even fol- These opportunities include focusing on how to 

lowing an economic recession from 2008 to 2011. integrate and promote fan safety at live events, how 

Specifically, according to the International Health, to leverage or engage with digital tools that support 

Racquet and Sportsclub Association (IHRSA, 2020), fan engagement throughout the year, and how to 

more than 200,000 health and fitness clubs exist further use or engage in data-driven strategies and 

globally, serving 184 million members and gener- decision making (Deloitte, 2020b). For-profit sport 

ating $906.7 billion in revenue. The United States and physical activity participation organizations are 

alone saw 27 percent growth in the number of not only examining but also implementing new and 

health club consumers served between 2010 and creative ways to engage fans, such as chat-based 

2019. The health and fitness industry has many parties or trivia contests through professional sport 

facets; someone pursuing a career as a personal league apps, or reinventing participation opportu- 

trainer, for example, needs to prepare for different nities, such as streaming exercise classes through 

professional responsibilities and therefore requires online memberships. 

different educational training than someone plan- The for-profit sport participation segment has 

ning to work in sport management. also realized growth in existing product mixes by 

Of particular interest to potential sport managers supplementing core products such as resistance 

is the breadth of interest in sport participation. The training with newer offerings such as Zumba, 

sport industry is continuing to diversify. On one spinning, and yoga. In addition, more and more 

hand, according to the National Sporting Goods sport and fitness businesses cater to specific target 

Association, participants continue to embrace tra- markets (e.g., body building, children, cosmetic 

ditional activities such as fitness, team sports, and fitness, cross training, performance enhancement, 

individual sports (NSMA, 2020). At the same time, time-pressed professionals). Employment opportu- 

sport participation is ever evolving and includes a nities vary according to the size of the organization, 

number of nontraditional activities such as corn- but they exist in a variety of functional areas: 

hole, disc golf, and spikeball (Ledesma, 2020). e Management 
Career opportunities are also available in adventure 

e Sales 
activities and events such as mud races, color races, 
fitness competitions, and tournaments. ¢ Marketing 

The COVID-19 global pandemic had a signifi- e Program planning 

cant impact on engagement and participation, and ° Human resources 
it required the sport industry to further diversify 

¢ Risk management 
and evolve. Globally, leagues, competitions, and 

major events, such as the Olympic and Paralym- Thus, for-profit sport organizations are in an envi- 

pic games in Tokyo, were cancelled, delayed, or able position as their target markets and product 

rescheduled, which affected the sport industry’s lines expand. 



ma 400 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Nonprofit Participation Segment Support Services 
As discussed in chapter 14, the nonprofit sport par- The support services segment includes an even 
ticipation segment is replete with jobs for qualified wider array of sport organizations than do the pre- 
sport management professionals. Examples include vious two segments. It includes both the sporting 
YMCAs (now known as The Y), YWCAs, Boys & goods industry and a variety of service providers; 
Girls Clubs, and hospital-affiliated fitness centers. these vast categories are explored in the following 
As in other industry segments, individual jobs in sections. 
these organizations may be specialized in one of 
the functional areas identified in figure 15.1 or Sporting Goods 
they may be more general. For example, a branch The sporting goods industry represents a signifi- 
of The Y located in a major metropolitan area may cant portion of the overall sport industry. In 2018, 
offer job opportunities in specialized functional U.S. consumers purchased almost $70 billion of 
areas, whereas a Boys & Girls Club may employ sporting goods (NSGA, 2019), and the industry 
one person to be responsible for all recreation-re- employs roughly 250,000 people at the retail level 
lated areas. (IBISWorld, 2020), a number that does not include 

Like many other areas in sport, the nonprofit those employed by manufacturers and wholesalers. 
sport participation sector offers many and varied In this context, sport managers play a vital role in 
opportunities. The YMCA is a leading nonprofit ascertaining what sport products people need and 
organization that engages over 9 million youth and want. Employment opportunities in the sporting 
13 million adults annually in personal development, goods industry include the following: 
healthy living, and community-based programs 
(The Y, 2020a). In 2020, The Y had 2,700 branches ¢ Research analyst 

with roughly 20,000 full-time employees in about * Retail store manager 
10,000 communities in the United States. The Y ¢ Manufacturing sales representative 
also has a global presence; indeed, some 45 million 

¢ Accounting manager 
people in 119 countries are affected by programs, 
services, or facilities ran by The Y (The Y, 2020b). e Licensing administrator 

Kinesiology Colleagues 

Angela Buckner 
Angela Buckner serves as a recreation director at the Lynette 
Woodard Recreation Center and the Fairmount Community 
Center, and is the codirector of the Atwater Neighborhood 
Resource Center in Wichita, Kansas, which is the largest 
and most diverse city in Kansas. Within her many roles and 
duties, she oversees close to 25 full-time staff and provides 
programming for almost 62,000 patrons annually. Buckner is 
a Certified Park and Recreation Professional and an Aquatic 
Facility Operator for Wichita Park and Recreation, and she 
values community engagement and creativity. For example, 
she started a volunteer program that to date has resulted 
in more than 100 people volunteering almost 12,000 hours 
within her recreation centers and programs for an annual cost 
savings of almost $16,000. After highly decorated high school 
and Division | athletic careers that resulted in her election to 
various halls of fame (including the Kansas Sports Hall of 
Fame), Buckner translated her love of athletics into a reward- 
ing career within the recreation management profession 
where she promotes healthy living and diverse communities. 



Chapter 15| Careers in Sport Management 401 

Considering Career Options in the Sporting Goods Industry 
Do you have a special interest in sports equipment or apparel? Perhaps you like to explore the 
newest merchandise on the market or imagine designing your own sport clothing. Or maybe you 
like to mine data and research trends in order to predict the newest fads in athletics. Or perhaps 
you're great at getting people excited about new products or services. All of these skills and inter- 
ests could contribute to a career in sporting goods. 

Sport Services Roles for Sport Management 
As a result of the sport industry’s enormous 

Professionals 
growth, sport-related services have become more 
specialized. Sport managers can now specialize in Sport management practitioners perform many 
sport insurance, sport event management, or sport similar professional roles regardless of the industry 
marketing; this segment of the industry is known segment in which they are employed. Therefore, 
as sport services. Here are a few examples of rather than list separate professions in the sphere 
organizations that offer sport services: of sport management, as in previous chapters, we 

describe the sport industry in terms of functional 
* Sports & Fitness Insurance Corporation: 

roles and related tasks that may be assigned to one 
Provides insurance for health clubs, fitness 

or more employees. 
centers, martial arts studios, personal train- 
ers, and dance schools. 

Event Management 
* Collegiate Licensing Company: Housed 

within sport management and marketing In all physical activity professions, the staging of 
firm IMG College with specific responsibility an event is a tremendous undertaking. As a result, 
for licensing programs at universities and many organizations hire people with specific 
colleges. expertise in venue and event management. These 

¢ Exclusive Sports Marketing: Promotes and employees are responsible for the many tasks 

manages recreational sporting events such associated with hosting an event, including risk 
management, security, venue setup, concessions, 

as triathlons. 
scheduling, game presentation, customer service, 

¢ Anthony Travel: Specializes in working with and many more. Although a single person may 
university athletic departments, professional cover all of these responsibilities for a small-scale 
sport organizations, individual athletes, and event, large staffs are commonly employed for 
fans. major events. For instance, Super Bowl LIV had 

¢ KMM Sports: An agency that represents a 18 people on its host committee, 23 members of 
range of clients as they negotiate playing its executive staff (Live It Miami, n.d.), and more 
contracts, marketing and endorsement than 10,000 volunteers who worked in a variety of 
agreements, and other legal matters. roles to meet the minimum requirement of three 

shifts during Super Bowl week (Gutzmore, 2019). 
The final example in the preceding list relates 

Ultimately, the event attracted more than 100,000 
to an area that interests many sport management 

visitors to Miami on game week with an expected 
students—a career as a player agent. This segment 

economic impact of $500 million (Portero, 2020). 
of the field is hypercompetitive, even by sport 
industry standards. And while such careers can 
be potentially lucrative, most sport agents realize BeKEY CON ee 
more modest incomes. Many sport agents pursue 
advanced degrees—including the juris doctorate Sport event management is a complex function 

(law degree)—to fully prepare themselves for pro- because it requires skills specific both to securing, 

fessional practice. A final consideration is that some organizing, and executing an event and to creating 

sport organizations, such as the National Basketball partnerships with other organizations that may have 

Players Association, require that agents be certified, a stake in the event. 
and they have related exam requirements. 



mm 402 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Crowd Control and Security 

In the wake of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, there was widespread fear that sporting 

events could be the next targets (National Center for Spectator Sports Safety and Security, 2017). 

For example, on April 15, 2013, two terrorists planted and exploded multiple bombs at the Boston 

Marathon, killing three people and injuring almost 300 others. This high-profile incident highlighted 

the need for security and the difficult nature of implementing crowd control and security strategies 

at sporting events. Specifically, the unique nature of a marathon—the course is over 26 miles 

(42 kilometers) long—illustrated some of the different challenges in securing sporting events. 

The following year, security procedures for the marathon included greater police presence, more 

than 100 surveillance cameras, bag searches, and 400 heavily armed military police personnel 

(Quinn, 2014). In addition to these logistical changes, cultural changes were also implemented. 

For example, organizers discontinued the tradition of letting unauthorized participants run parts 
of the course with the official participants. 

Although this is a particularly large and dramatic example, adequate crowd control and secu- 
rity strategies should be identified prior to any sporting event, regardless of size or anticipated 
attendance. It also illustrated the need for specific educational and awareness-raising measures 
to address the relatively unique nature of security at sporting events. The University of Southern 
Mississippi established the National Center for Spectator Sports Safety and Security (NCS*), which 
works closely with the U.S. Department of Homeland Security to provide education and indus- 
try best practices and training programs for groups and organizations associated with sporting 
events. Their work is based on operational perspectives and collaborative research opportunities 
with those from the fields of sport management, homeland security, emergency management, 
professional development, and incident response (National Center for Spectator Sports Safety 
and Security, 2017). 

Who is responsible for crowd control and security at a sporting event? What factors are involved 
in safely controlling a crowd? 

Venue and event management requires sport Once an event is scheduled, sport commission 
managers to consider a multitude of factors, includ- personnel collaborate with others (e.g., team 
ing traffic control, crowd control, security, medical owners, employees, volunteers) to ensure that the 
care, resource availability, and management and event is a success. For example, a sport commission 
coordination of both paid personnel and volun- that secures a bid to bring a bowling championship 
teers. Therefore, opportunities to work in this area to its city would work closely with practitioners in 
are widespread and vary from the Super Bowl to the local bowling community to ensure that ade- 
an evening of Little League baseball at a local park. quate facilities are available, customer service is 

Sport commissions—local entities that work exemplary, scheduling is organized, and volunteers 
to attract sporting events and franchises to their are gathered and committed. 
cities in order to boost the local economy—have 
seen enormous growth in the United States in Financial Management 
recent years. In fact, the Sports Events & Tourism 
Association (Sports ETA) has grown from 15 mem- Financial management is critical to the opera- 

bers in 1992, when it was known as the National tion of most sport-related organizations. Financial 

Association of Sports Commissions, to more than managers may administer budgets, oversee income 

700 member organizations and 2,000 individuals allocation, pursue development opportunities, and 

(Sports Events & Tourism Association, 2019). Sim- handle investments. Managing financial situations 

ilarly, the Canadian Sport Tourism Alliance (CSTA) for sport organizations requires knowledge and 

now boasts more than 500 members who want to understanding of the necessary financial tools (e.g., 
cultivate travel to their towns and cities for sporting financial statements, budgeting procedures) and of 
events (CSTA, n.d.). Clearly, employment opportu- the sport product. Without understanding the sport 
nities in this sector of the field are abundant and product, a person is not equipped to capitalize on 
expanding globally. potential revenue opportunities. 



Chapter 15| Careers in Sport Management 403 

BG ROINTs 2p ierre eee (Chelladurai, 2006; Miller, 1997; Weerakoon, 2016). 

High demand for sport-related products creates a Employees of sport organizations are arguably their 

positive environment for the financing of a variety of organization’s greatest asset. Happy and contented 
employees are more loyal to the organization, 

sport facilities, including health clubs, swimming pools, 
which results in a more experienced staff and 

arenas, and stadiums. 
lower employee turnover costs. Employees are 
responsible for the entire sport-product delivery 

Two areas of sport financial management that process, including customer service, operations, 

provide a considerable number of opportunities are and other crucial functions. A gap in any functional 

accounting and facility finance. All sport organiza- area dilutes the quality of the sport product. In 

tions, and almost all employees in the sport indus- turn, low-quality products eventually fall below 

try, are involved in some manner of accounting the financial break-even point, thus causing sport 

and budgeting. Sport marketers, for example, are organizations to go out of business. 

responsible for promotions, advertising, and spon- 
sorships and must meet revenue goals. Similarly, 

KeEL PON) e8 e 
sport event managers must balance the expenses of 
staging an event—including facility rental, staffing, Employees arguably represent the greatest asset of 
and concessions purchases—with the expected any sport organization; therefore, the human resource 
revenues from ticket sales, sponsorships, and the function is critical because it selects, trains, and retains 
other sources. high-caliber people. 

Financing facilities has become an important 
issue in the sport industry. Humphreys (2019) 
reviewed recent data and noted over 129 sports Human resource managers work to combine 

facilities have been renovated or built in North employees’ talents and desires with the needs of 

America since 1970 for MLB, NBA, NFL, and NHL the organization in order to create a pleasant and 

teams. The cost for these facilities was estimated legally defensible work environment. These manag- 

at $53 billion with direct state and local subsidies ers have traditionally dealt with the hiring, training, 

accounting for over $32 billion (Humphreys, 2019). maintenance, and dismissal of employees. Recent 

Sport organizations and their public constituents trends, however, reveal a far broader scope of work 

have used a variety of sources to fund their projects, associated with human resource management. For 

including private-sector money (e.g., corporate example, these managers may also organize and 

sponsorships), public support (e.g., subsidies, tax manage such benefits as day care for employees’ 

abatements), and organizational revenue (e.g., children, employee stock ownership plans, profes- 

personal seat licenses, luxury seating) (Howard & sional development opportunities, fitness facilities, 

Crompton, 2014). The growth in facility construc- and counseling services—all of which are designed 

tion has provided those interested with a number to attract and keep high-quality employees. 

of finance-related jobs in the sport industry. Human resource managers carry added respon- 
sibilities in sport organizations that have employee 
unions. Unions negotiate agreements with manage- 

Human Resource Management ment regarding compensation, working conditions, 
Human resource management, also known as and other issues. Union-management relations are 
personnel management, may be one of the most critical to a sport organization’s profitability. Sport 
important job functions in the sport industry managers who are employed outside of profes- 

Considering Your Experiences as an Employee 

Think of an organization where you have worked. Did that organization create a friendly work envi- 

ronment conducive to productivity and efficiency? What did the organization do well? What could 

it have done to improve the work environment? Does tackling such issues interest you? Can you 

see yourself being an instrument of change in an organization, recruiting others, establishing 

workplace policies, or ensuring company compliance with employment guidelines? If so, human 

resource management might be the profession for you. 



my 404 Introduction to Kinesiology 

sional sport may also encounter union issues when compliance-related failures in NCAA athletics can 

dealing with concessions and merchandising ven- be illustrated by a survey of popular media inves- 

dors, security personnel, and officials and umpires. tigations. For example, Ganim (2015) reviewed 

investigative reports from the New York Times, 

the Ann Arbor News, and the Chronicle of Higher 
Risk Management 

Education and found coverage of a number of 
As U.S. society has grown increasingly litigious, cases involving various forms of academic fraud 
sport administrators have become more concerned and extra or impermissible benefits provided to 
about risk management. Sport managers today student-athletes. According to a search on the 
face many complex issues that warrant advice from NCAA's LSDBi (Legislative Services Database), 146 
attorneys and other legal experts, and all sport cases involving major infractions at the Division I 
managers should have the knowledge they need level occurred from 2010 through 2019 (National 
to minimize risks for their organizations. Collegiate Athletic Association, n.d.). In this con- 

text, a university compliance officer strives to 
make sure the athletic department complies with 

BeRECON e eee the rules and regulations in the lengthy NCAA 
Risk management involves taking steps to reduce compliance manual, with university policies and 
losses of all kinds. It requires the support of all employ- procedures, and with local, state, and federal laws 
ees, from top management down to the front line. and ordinances. 

Risk management has evolved from a predomi- Marketing Management 
nant concern about lawsuits to a more all-encom- Marketing management is a burgeoning area of 
passing concern about addressing risks of all kinds opportunity for qualified students. Some even sug- 
(Sharp et al., 2010). Today, the sport industry views gest that effective marketing is the key to success 
risk management as including, among other things, for any sport product, whether it is a new running 
losses resulting from inadequate or improper secu- shoe, a sport clinic, or a sporting event. Even a 
rity, food service distribution, supervision, instruc- great sport product, offered at an affordable price 
tion, and facility and equipment design. To protect and available in a favorable location, generates 
against losses of all kinds, many sport organizations little revenue unless people are aware of it. Sport 
have designated risk management personnel. Risk marketers may spend time working in a variety of 
management groups help sport entities to identify marketing management areas: 
potential hazards, suggest and implement ways » Research and development can range 
to manage potential losses, evaluate existing risk from sophisticated analyses of consumer opinions 
management plans, and continually improve exist- and economic impact studies to focus groups and 
ing risk management efforts. A successful sport brainstorming sessions on how to package and 
manager can apply risk management principles to present products more effectively. 
a variety of sport-related environments, ranging 

» Sport promotion involves taking action to 
from traditional sporting facilities to such unique 

heighten interest in sport products and increase 
environments as adventure sport coaching (Collins 

consumption in such forms as sales and viewer- 
& Collins, 2013). 

ship. Promotions are tactics used by marketers 
Risk management is especially important in the 

to communicate with and attract buyers. They 
amateur and professional segments of the sport 

come in a wide range of forms, including product 
entertainment industry. Besides attending to the 

sampling opportunities, premium giveaways, price 
concerns already listed, the entertainment indus- 

reductions, player appearances, camps, and clinics 
try segment must also comply with complex rules 

(Irwin et al., 2008; Mullin et al., 2014). 
and regulations established by governing organi- 
zations. Fearing losses to their athletic programs, » Sport sponsorship involves an exchange 
some colleges have responded by using outside between a company and a sport organization. For 

legal assistance in their compliance efforts. Many example, a sponsoring company may provide either 
others have designated particular administrators cash or in-kind resources (products or services) in 
as compliance officers. exchange for sponsorship of an event. For example, 

Compliance-related failures are unfortunately 14 official sponsors were associated with the 2020 
common, and their consequences have been well College Football Playoff, including Allstate, Capital 
documented by the news media. The multitude of One, Dr. Pepper, and Taco Bell (College Football 



Chapter 15| Careers in Sport Management 405 

Playoff, n.d.). Sponsorships represent powerful pro- lucrative market of esports, which is projected to 
motional platforms that build brand awareness for generate over $1.5 billion globally (Deloitte, 2020a), 
sponsoring companies. They provide an important includes a focus on merchandising. Indeed, Reyes 
revenue stream for sport organizations, but sport (2019) noted that merchandising accounted for a 
managers must be mindful of which brands make sizable revenue stream for the esports ecosystem 
for the best and most appropriate partners for their as companies continue to connect gaming, pop 
sport organizations. This issue is illustrated in the culture, and media. Some sport organizations con- 
accompanying case study. duct their own merchandising programs, whereas 

» Advertising consists of “any paid, non- others sell licenses to other businesses to place 
personal (not directed to individuals), clearly their names and logos on various products. 

sponsored message conveyed through the media” >» Distribution connects a sport product or 
(Mullin et al., 2014, p. 266). It is one of the most service with the ultimate consumer. For sporting 
important and visible tools available to people goods manufacturers, distribution includes building 
who work in sport (Shank & Lyberger, 2015). Many relationships with distributors and retailers, secur- 
sport-related organizations purchase advertising ing optimal shelf space, and maintaining low-cost 
to promote their events or sell their services or product transportation systems. For sport managers 
products. in the entertainment or participation sector, distri- 

» Merchandising efforts extend far beyond bution concerns may include facility design, acces- 

apparel. Customers who visit sport specialty stores sibility, flexibility, and attractiveness because the 

may choose from an array of licensed products, sport product (an event or game) is produced and 

including toys, automobile accessories, and even consumed in the same location, such as a stadium. 

pasta in the shape of team mascots. The highly Broadcasting arrangements may also be considered 

Case Study in Assessment 

Randy believes adamantly in the power of sport to exert a positive effect on people. Therefore, 
he was very excited about taking a position as director of marketing and sponsorships for the 
athletic department at a public (state-supported) Division II university in the U.S. Midwest. Randy 
saw his organization as playing an important role not only in entertaining the community but also 
in educating and informing citizens about worthwhile causes in the region—all while developing 
student-athletes into productive members of society. 

Decision 

Soon after starting his new job, Randy was presented with a sponsorship opportunity from a well- 
known beer distributor and brewery. The sponsorship would have brought much-needed revenue 
to an athletic department struggling with decreased donor contributions brought about by an eco- 
nomic recession. However, Randy was aware that alcohol abuse is prevalent on many campuses, 
and he wondered what kind of message is sent when a college athletic department promotes 
beer brands. He had many factors to weigh before making a decision regarding the sponsorship 
opportunity. For instance, he needed to check university policy and current sponsorship trends in 
college athletics while weighing the various pros and cons. 

Resolution 

With the athletic department's financial well-being in question, the beer distributor's proposal must 

be considered carefully. In accordance with the athletic department’s vision (and Randy's), any 

signs posted in athletic facilities could be used as an awareness opportunity. For example, the 

posted signs, although associated with the beer distributor's name and logo, could be designed 

to educate community members about the dangers of excessive alcohol consumption. This reso- 

lution allows the distributor to be associated with the athletic department, brings the department 

a much-needed financial boost, and educates both college students and community members 

about the importance of responsible drinking behavior. 



ma 406 Introduction to Kinesiology 

distribution-related issues because they focus on diverse activities ranging from media relations to 

getting the sport product to consumers (Mullin community relations and investor relations. 

et al., 2014). The NFL provides a good example A number of people in sport organizations 

of the potential magnitude of such agreements in specialize in communication, and almost all pro- 

the sport entertainment industry. The league reaps fessional and college sport organizations assign 

nearly $5 billion in television rights fees each year at least one person to a public relations—related 
(Deitsch, 2011), and the current broadcast rights position, such as athletic communications, media 

agreement that extends through the 2022 season relations, or sports information director. These 
is worth almost $30 billion (Badenhausen, 2011). employees produce organizational media, track 
Early projections note that the next NFL broad- statistics, arrange interviews, supply story ideas, 
cast rights agreement could look very different and service media requests. Digital and social 
and include a variety of new companies, such as media have radically changed athletic communi- 
Amazon and YouTube TV, in addition to traditional cations positions as many professionals are now 
media powerhouses, such as FOX, Comcast, Disney, also responsible for creating branded content and 
and ViacommCBS (Sherman, 2020). managing social media platforms. In some organi- 

zations, separate positions exist as social and digital 
media specialists. By communicating organizational 

BING Ver UN eee ape ees ee rs es messages and sharing compelling stories, these 

Sport management students who are educated in individuals provide an integral link between the 

sport marketing often hold great appeal for employers organization and its stakeholders. 

in all sport industry segments. A background in sport Although the media may be more integrally 
involved in sport than in any other industry in 

marketing provides both lateral and vertical career 
the United States, public relations management 

opportunities. 
involves much more than just media relations. For 
example, sport entertainment organizations often 
employ people specifically to work in fan relations, 

Public Relations Management and sporting goods businesses generally have cus- 

Public relations management in sport seeks to tomer relations employees who provide a variety 

achieve positive relationships between the sport of services ranging from handling complaints to 

organization and its most important constituents giving special instructions about product assembly. 

(Stoldt, Dittmore, & Branvold, 2012; Stoldt, Dit- Some sport managers also work in community 

tmore, & Pedersen, 2014). This work involves relations. These public relations professionals may 

Corporate Social Responsibility in Sport 

Corporate social responsibility (CSR) in sport is characterized by varied “forms of community 
improvements, volunteerism, philanthropy, environmental initiatives, or educational and health 
programs, [where] most sport organizations and many athletes identify the need to support some 
form of social involvement” (Walker & Parent, 2010, p. 200). The sport industry’s understanding 
and implementation of CSR has grown significantly over the last 20 years (Kihl, in press). To learn 
about how CSR mechanisms and processes evolve over time, Heinze et al. (2014) studied the CSR 
efforts made by the NFL’s Detroit Lions. They noted that the organization’s change in approach 
centered on three key results and strategies. 

First, the Lions decided on a strategic approach that was more direct and specific than pre- 
vious broad strategies of raising money and distributing that money to a variety of charitable 
organizations or causes. Second, the team selected high-impact areas and used programming 
that focused on “sustainable community health, wellness, and development” (p. 677). Third, the 
organization involved the local community in a bottom-up approach in which specific communities 
communicated their needs to the team. Heinze et al.'s (2014) research details not only how the 
Lions organization affected its community but also some key processes in professional epert 
organizations’ continued efforts to “give back.” 



Chapter 15| Careers in Sport Management 407 

seek opportunities for organizational representa- instance, may offer a youth sport program, an 
tives to make public appearances or speeches. They aquatics program, and a fitness program. In turn, 
may also coordinate donations to good causes, each program is staffed with its own employees 
promote the organization’s environmental initia- who deliver activities such as lessons, clinics, and 
tives, and execute other tasks pertaining to social tournaments. 
responsibility. Program management activities vary across func- 

tional areas and sport industry segments. Two of 

Program Management the more common task areas are scheduling and 
maintenance of facilities and equipment. 

Program management is common in all sport 
industry segments. Sport programs are delivered, Scheduling 
for example, by health clubs, parks and recreation 

Scheduling is one of the primary concerns for 
departments, athletic departments, and sport 

program managers. For instance, many a Little 
services. A parks and recreation department, for 

Professional Issues in Kinesiology 

Equality: Diversity and Inclusion in Kinesiology 
For some time now, the field of sport management has emphasized the importance of diversity, 
inclusion, and other issues related to equality. More than a decade ago, for instance, the NCAA noted 
the importance of providing diversity training and diverse opportunities for student-athletes and sport 
organizational personnel (NCAA, 2005). More recent examples include working toward understanding 
the barriers faced by ethnic minority students in accessing campus recreation facilities, events, and 
programs (Hoang et al., 2016); development of culturally sensitive sport programming in Canadian 
Red Cross swimming programs (Rich & Giles, 2015); the hiring and empowerment of new execu- 
tives with responsibilities for diversity and inclusion at leagues such as MLB, the NBA, and the NFL 
(Lombardo & Mullen, 2018); and the implementation of employee resource groups organized around 
interests and backgrounds (e.g., ethnicity, sexual orientation) at ESPN (MacIntosh & Burton, 2019). 

The commitment to diversity, inclusion, and equality extends to the sport management class- 
room as well. Efforts are ongoing not only to develop culturally sensitive classrooms but also to 
educate students using descriptive and effective theories, strategies, and tools (Bruening et al., 
2014). For example, Vianden and Gregg (2017) noted that White, heterosexual male sport practi- 
tioners often narrowly defined not only diversity within the sport industry but also ways to improve 
it. They concluded that sport management education must continue to develop educational tools 
to improve students’ understanding of diversity and inclusion within the industry. Such measures 
could include critical self-reflections, more diverse curricula and faculty, and promotion of a sense 
of shared responsibility for diversity and inclusion among all stakeholders in sport management 
education (Vianden & Gregg, 2017). 

Citation style: APA 
Bruening, J., Fuller, R.D., Catrufo, R.J., Madsen, R.M., Evanovich, J., & Wilson-Hill, D.E. (2014). Applying inter- 
group contact theory to the sport management classroom. Sport Management Education Journal, 8(1), 35-46. 

Hoang, T.V., Cardinal, B.J., & Newhart, D.W. (2016). An exploratory study of ethnic minority students’ con- 

straints to and facilitators of engaging in campus recreation. Recreational Sports Journal, 40(1), 69-82. 

Lombardo, J., & Mullen, L. (2018, July 30). Gaining momentum. Street & Smith's Sports Business Journal. 

Retrieved from www.sportsbusinessdaily.com/Journal/Issues/2018/07/30/In-Depth.aspx 

Macintosh, E.W., & Burton, L.J. (2019). Organizational behavior in sport management. Human Kinetics. 

National Collegiate Athletic Association. (2005, February 25). Commitment to diversity programming. NCAA 

News, 42(5), A2. 

Rich, K., & Giles, A. (2015). Managing diversity to provide culturally safe sport programming: A case study 

of the Canadian Red Cross’s swim program. Journal of Sport Management, 29(3), 305-318. 



Mm 408 Introduction to Kinesiology 

League coordinator has dealt with scheduling KEY: POINT ene 
complications stemming from too many teams with Job opportunities abound for qualified people in sport 
access to too few facilities. Sport entertainment management, thanks in part to the proliferation of 
administrators must also address scheduling and 

professional teams, societal interest in health and 
related considerations. Scheduling games, events, 

fitness, technological developments, and the presence 
and even practices can be complicated when other 
events in the community affect public demand or of eclectic consumers with varying needs. 

when one facility must accommodate multiple 
demands. Scheduling travel can also be a complex The vast array of job.opportunities in sport 
undertaking, and some athletic programs employ management is also illustrated by data from the 
administrators whose primary function is to coor- U.S. Department of Labor. Table 15.1 provides 
dinate travel. information about the mean salaries for selected 

positions and sectors of the industry. 
Facility and Equipment Maintenance 
Maintenance of facilities and equipment is a crucial 
task for program managers. Those who work in Education and Qualifications 
sport participation organizations must maintain and The North American Society for Sport Management 
update facilities to meet the needs and demands (NASSM) website lists hundreds of colleges and 
of consumers; this work includes keeping facilities universities that offer sport management programs 
and equipment clean, safe, and operative. In addi- at the bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral levels 
tion, sport managers must monitor the external (North American Society for Sport Management, 
environment (e.g., competitor actions, changes in n.d.). More than 500 of those programs are located 
consumer demographics and psychographics) for in the United States; others are found in Canada, 
information that can be used to enhance consumer Europe, Africa, Asia, India, Australia, New Zealand, 
offerings and customer satisfaction. and the Middle East. If you review the program 

information for even a handful of the institutions 

Career Prospects and Opportunities listed on the NASSM website, you will likely find 
considerable variation among the programs in 

in Sport Management 
terms of focus, breadth, depth, departmental home, 

The sport management industry offers a pleth- and experiential learning requirements. High-qual- 
ora of job opportunities in a variety of industry ity programs can be structured in a variety of ways, 
segments and functional areas. In fact, it can be and no single program offers the best fit for all 
difficult to determine objectively which segment prospective students. 
is the most popular because they all appear to be The Commission on Sport Management Accred- 
hiring qualified students of sport management. itation (COSMA) is an accrediting body whose 
Still, a review of various websites and trade pub- purpose is “to recognize excellence in sport 
lications provides insight into the available job management education” (Commission on Sport 
opportunities. For example, TeamWork Online Management Accreditation, 2016). When COSMA 
advertises administrative jobs available in most of reviews a program, it considers, among many other 
the major professional sport leagues and in large factors, how well the curriculum is grounded in the 
sport entertainment companies. program’s mission, goals, and objectives, which 

Considering Career Options in Sport Program Management 

Think of a sport organization with which you are familiar. What programs does the organization 
offer? Do you have the skills and aptitudes necessary to run such programs? If you are inter- 
ested in program management, what skills would you need to develop? What can you do to start 
developing these skills? What opportunities are available to you now? What opportunities might 
require some research and planning to get involved in? Make a plan for your skill development. 



Chapter 15| Careers in Sport Management 409 

Table 15.1 Mean Salaries for Sel
p ected Jo
c bs Associated With Sport 

ea 
Industry sector Job type Annual mean salary 

Spectator sport Chief executive $239,500 

Sales manager $124,370 

Agents and business managers of artists, per- $95,260 
formers, and athletes 

Coaches and scouts $68,860 

Market research and marketing specialist $54,880 

Fitness and recreational sport centers Chief executive $197,770 

Sales manager $94,260 

Recreation and fitness worker $44,960 

Supervisor, personal services $43,130 
Data from U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics (2019). 

clearly demonstrate what students are learning 5. Integrative experiences and career planning 
(Commission on Sport Management Accreditation, » Internship or other practical or experien- 
2016). Many universities offer sport management tial learning 
programs, but only about two dozen provide COS- 

>» Capstone experience 
MA-accredited programs. Programs seeking accred- 
itation at the undergraduate level are expected Reprinted by permission from Commission on Sport Management 

to feature a curriculum based on standardized Accreditation (COSMA), Accreditation Principles Manual & Guidelines for 

principles covering five broad areas (Commission Self-Study Preparation, (2016), http://www.cosmaweb.org/accredita 

tion-manuals.html. 
on Sport Management Accreditation, 2016, p. 12): 

Although all of the content areas listed are crit- 
1. Foundations of sport: historical, sociological, ical to attaining a high-quality sport management 

and psychological education, the internship and other integrative 
experiences (e.g., practicum) deserve special 

2. Foundations of sport management 
emphasis. Sport organizations look for people with 

>» Management concepts practical, real-world sport experience. Because the 
>» Governance and policy sport management industry is extremely competi- 

> International sport tive, the references, knowledge, and work experi- 
ence that you gain from an internship site super- 

3. Functions of sport management visor are invaluable. Consequently, an internship 
or other form of integrative experience is essential 

>» Sport operations 
to your ability not only to secure a job but also to 

> Sport marketing 
learn the best practices in the industry. 

> Sport communication 

> Sport finance and economics 
KEY: PON eee ee ee ee ee 

4. Sport management environment Sport management students should capitalize on 

>» Legal aspects of sport management available internship opportunities with credible sport 

> Ethical aspects of sport management management organizations. 

> Diversity issues in sport management 

>» Technological advances in sport man- Students can obtain internships in any of the sport 

agement industry segments discussed earlier. Responsibilities 
associated with internships tend to be situation spe- 



mm 410 Introduction to Kinesiology 

cific. For example, an internship at a Division I insti- ology, or anatomy and physiology. Course work in 

tution might be highly specialized. In other words, theoretical kinesiology, however, can significantly 

the intern might work specifically in one area, such enhance a person’s marketability in the sport par- 

as compliance, marketing, facilities, operations, or ticipation sector. For example, students who work 

tickets. In contrast, an internship at a Division III in the health club industry can improve their mar- 

institution might combine roles. In this situation, the ketability by combining a sport management degree 
intern might work in a variety of areas, including with course work in appropriate areas of theoretical 
marketing, facilities, operations, and tickets. kinesiology. This well-rounded education enables a 

All of the competency areas recognized by sport manager to make better hiring decisions and 
COSMA are identified, either directly or indirectly, provide better supervision. 

in figure 15.1. As you can see, each functional 
area is somewhat dependent on, and linked to, the 
others. Moreover, many benefits can be gained from Trends and Opportunities 
an understanding of each area. For example, if you in Sport Management 
are working in a youth sport program, you will be 
better able to provide successful program offerings Nielsen Sports (2018) released an insightful report 

if you understand budgetary limitations, manage- describing the most important trends affecting the 

rial issues, consumer behaviors, risk management global sport industry. Noting that the “feeling of 

principles, and societal implications. Similarly, if rapid, great change is very real” (Lovett quoted in 

you work with a professional hockey franchise, you Nielsen Sports, 2018, p. 2), the report discussed 

will gain a better understanding of the intricacies five key developments. 

involved and the communication required of those 1. Distributor disruption: The media envi- 
working in various functional areas of a large event. ronment continues to evolve with new 
You will learn, for example, that executing promo- technologies intersecting with changes in 
tions requires close cooperation among the people how customers receive sport content. More 
working in the area of facilities. Sound effects (e.g., opportunities than ever exist for sport prop- 
music, clapping hands), lighting, fixtures, and so on erties to reach consumers. 
must be coordinated so that fans are entertained, 

2. Esports evolution: Interest in esports is 
the sponsor’s promotion is flawlessly executed, and 

growing rapidly, making it one of the most 
promotion participants are not injured. 

dynamic sectors of the industry. The side- 
bar Hot Career Opportunity: The Growing 

EU eee eee Ee eR Esports Phenomenon examines this trend 
in greater detail. 

Multifaceted professionals can make decisions that 
3. Content rules: Games and highlights alone 

serve the best interests of the sport organization as a 
are no longer sufficient to engage fans on 

whole rather than benefiting only particular business 
a sustained basis. Mobile media usage in 

functions within the organization. 
particular continues to be a game-changer. 

4. Sponsorship to partnership: Sponsorship has 
When you understand how multiple issues and long been a key revenue stream for many 

functional areas influence your product—be it sport organizations. As sport properties 
a sport event, a clinic, or a line of apparel—you and their sponsors become more savvy in 
are better able to communicate with colleagues, structuring such agreements, relationships 
employees, and customers. Your conceptual are better characterized as partnerships. 
understanding makes you an invaluable asset to 5. Sports in our changing society: Social 
your sport organization. In addition, by being responsibility has never been more import- 
knowledgeable in a variety of competency areas, ant, and sport consumers indicate they will 
you enhance your marketability in the profession. prioritize those properties that are commit- 

Students preparing for sport management careers ted to doing good. 
follow different curricula than do students studying 
for such careers as teaching, coaching, personal The Nielsen Sports report (2018) noted the 
training, and athletic training. As you have seen, increased competition in the sport industry, but 
sport management students are often not required also emphasized the multitude of opportunities 
to take courses in motor learning, exercise physi- in the field. 



Chapter 15| Careers in Sport Management 411 

Hot Career Opportunity 
The Growing Esports Phenomenon 

According to the Deloitte Center for Technology, Media and Telecommunications, in 2020, the 
esports market was expected to generate approximately $1.5 billion in annual revenues and 
engage with an audience of over 600 million fans across the globe. The robust annual revenues 
are primarily drawn from sponsorships and advertising, which includes streaming and broadcast 
sponsorships with multiple platforms such as Twitch, YouTube Gaming, Mixer, and Facebook Gaming 
(Deloitte, 2020a). The popularity of esports appears not to be slowing down any time soon. It 
is estimated that frequent, or enthusiastic, viewers of esports will increase from 173 million in 
2018 to almost 300 million by 2023. During that same time, occasional, or casual, viewership is 
predicted to also increase from 222 million in 2018 to over 350 million by 2023 (Gough, 2020). 
Such growth presents a range of opportunities for sport management professionals as well as 
esports athletes. 

One of the implications of the trends reported by is to negotiate mutually acceptable agreements 
Nielsen (2018) is that the sport industry is growing between player personnel and management or to 
more global by the day. Global sport properties, secure corporate support for a community running 
such as the World Cup, now command extrava- event, managers with strong collaborative skills 
gant rights fees from media companies wanting and creative minds will enjoy advantages in the 
to broadcast the matches on U.S. television. NBA competitive marketplace. 
stars now enjoy celebrity status in countries as far 
away as China. Diverse populations are now recog- 
nized for their achievements in global events such Advice for Sport 
as the Paralympics. Sport managers who embrace Management Students 
the opportunities and challenges associated with 
globalization are well positioned for career growth. As you know from reading about other physical 

Another implication is that engagement is no activity professions in previous chapters, simply 

longer limited to the sport facility itself or to the meeting educational requirements does not ensure 

delivery of sport programming via mass media. your success as a sport management professional. 

“More markets around the world than ever before The field of sport management is hypercompetitive, 

are receptive to the power of sports. It’s never and you can enhance your career prospects by 

been easier to reach millions, even billions of gaining as much practical experience as possible, 

fans” (Lovett quoted in Nielsen Sports, 2018, p. 2). seeking a mentor, and building a professional net- 

Digital and social media now make it possible for work. Each of these actions will contribute to the 

consumers to interact at any time and in any place. development of a personal brand. Just as organi- 

As a result of ongoing technological change, sport zational brands such as adidas and Women’s World 

organizations need a strategic approach to sharing Cup distinguish properties in the marketplace, a 

their brand via storytelling and audience engage- personal brand communicates the attributes of 

ment. For example, the National Football League’s individuals that distinguish them from others in 

China office is using digital and social media to the professional environment. 

grow the Chinese fan base (Zheng, 2018). Using Besides completing the required courses and 

social media applications popular in China (e.g., obtaining your degree, you also need practical 

Weibo, WeChat), the league is cultivating consum- experience in your area of interest. Such experience 

ers in an important global market. is invaluable in helping you improve your commu- 

The industry trends also carry a third implica- nication skills and enhance your problem-solving 
skills. Understand the value of a mentor—someone 

tion—that as sport management becomes more 

competitive and complex, sport managers who in the field who can give you practical insights into 

can forge successful partnerships will be in high your new career. In addition, keep up with the 
profession by noticing and being aware of sport 

demand. The nature of those partnerships will 

vary from setting to setting. Whether the task management organizations’ administrative activities 



Me 412 Introduction to Kinesiology 

and reading professional journals; resources to get Practical Experience 
you started are listed at the end of this chapter. The 

You should always be at work building your resume 
following sections offer details on strategies that 

because practical experience is a necessity in the 
you can pursue to prepare for a career in sport 

competitive job market of the sport industry. Almost 
management. 

all programs have internship requirements, and we 
have already described the benefits of internships. 

Leadership Development The best internships, however, often go to students 

Recent leadership studies within sport manage- with the most job experience. Try to find part-time 

ment are moving away from looking solely at sport work in the sport industry and volunteer for special 

leaders’ traits and recognizing the importance of events (e.g., fun runs, triathlons, Special Olympics). 

stakeholders’ perceptions of leadership (Billsberry Such experiences allow you to apply what you 

et al., 2018). Stakeholders’ perceptions include the learned in the classroom to the job setting while 

views of sport organization employees, youth sport simultaneously gaining valuable resume material. 

athletes, and intercollegiate student-athletes, to 
name just a few. As a result of a better understand- Mentors 
ing of how leadership affects others, we assert that 

Mentors are people who work in a student’s chosen 
leadership skills can be developed by just about 

profession and provide students with guidance, 
everyone. Leadership courses, and in some cases 

learning opportunities, and contacts in the field. 
academic minors, are available at many colleges 

Students who have a mentor gain insights that they 
and universities, and a wide range of leadership 

cannot obtain in the classroom; they also have an 
development programs and resources are also 

advocate when they seek future jobs. Some mentor 
available beyond college campuses. The topic of 

relationships occur spontaneously when someone 
leadership may also be something to explore with 

with education and experience takes an interest 
a trusted mentor. 

Volunteering is a great way to build your resume and gain practical work experience. 
© Human Kinetics 



Chapter 15 |C areers in Sport Management 

in a student. You can also arrange a mentorship Technological Skills 
directly by asking someone to be your mentor. A 
variety of people can serve as mentors, incl Skills in the use of existing and emerging technol- 

uding 
job supervisors, university professors, and ogies are critical for all sport management practi- 

 family 
friends. You can even have more tha tioners. The scope of needed skills includes basic 

n one mentor, 
thus increasing your exposure to kno abilities to use computers, mobile devices, common 

wledge and 
Opportunities. office software, and popular applications, including 

social media. Often, more advanced capabilities 
are required, such as programming, web design, 

Communication Skills 
analytics, and software related to professional 

Strong communication skills are needed in almost specializations such as ticketing. The Kinesiology 
every functional area discussed in this chapter. Colleagues sidebar featuring Boomer Jenkins of 
Communication is the subject of at least one Sporting Kansas City provides an excellent exam- 
course in most undergraduate curriculums, and ple of how a sport management student leveraged 
we encourage sport management students to take technological skills to establish a career path. 
more than the minimum of communication-related Fortunately, a wide variety of resources are avail- 
courses because most jobs in the sport industry are able to help you build your technological skills, 
relationship oriented. Sales success, in particular, such as online tutorials and webinars and college 
is predicated on communication and relationship and university classes. Given the rapidly evolving 
management skills. And those students who can sell technological environment, the skill set students 
effectively will multiply their career prospects con- and practitioners have today will likely be outdated 
siderably. Bottom line: Whether you are interested within just a few years. A commitment to sustained 
in sales or not, it is essential that you be able to professional development in the use of technology 
communicate effectively in interpersonal situations, is mandatory to staying relevant. 
write well, and speak effectively in group settings. 

Generalization 
Problem-Solving Skills Sport-related jobs are plentiful but in high demand. 
Sport managers who make hiring decisions want If you obtain work experience in a variety of func- 

qualified employees with the educational and tional areas, you gain two advantages. First, by 

employment background to succeed on the job. experiencing different facets of the field, you posi- 
One characteristic that often distinguishes success- tion yourself well to identify which areas interest 

ful practitioners is their ability to analyze a problem you most. Second, you may expand the number of 

effectively and generate creative solutions. We jobs for which you are qualified. Once you have 

encourage you to enroll in courses that help you established a career path or advanced to graduate 

develop such skills and to seek work experiences school, you should work to identify a specialization. 

that require such skills. For example, by volun- 
teering to work in a fitness center’s membership 
campaign, you will gain experience that is more 
valuable than what you would gain by simply 
checking in members at the front desk. 

Assessing Your Sport Management Preparation 

Do you have the skills and aptitudes needed to pursue a career in sport management? Do you 

communicate clearly and confidently with people? Are you adept at problem solving? What types 

of experiences would be useful to pursue during your undergraduate years? Would you like to 

have a mentor? Have you considered seeking volunteer opportunities or part-time work in sport 

organizations to gain practical experience? 



mg 414 Introduction to Kinesiology 

Kinesiology Colleagues 

Boomer Jenkins 
William “Boomer” Jenkins understands how the effective use 
of analytics benefits sport organizations and the career paths 
of those with skill and expertise in the specialization. Jenkins 
serves as Business Intelligence Strategist for Sporting Kansas 
City, a franchise in Major League Soccer. In his position, Jenkins 
uses analytics to support the organization in making data- 
driven decisions in key areas such as ticket sales, marketing, 
social media, and corporate partnerships. 

Jenkins’ academic preparation included a bachelor’s degree 
in kinesiology and exercise science and a master’s degree in 
sport management. As part of his graduate program, Jenkins 
completed an internship in corporate partnership sales at 
Sporting KC. During that internship, Jenkins proved himself 
to be invaluable based on his skill in securing data, analyzing 
it ina coordinated fashion, and generating findings that could 
directly drive revenue generation. As a result, he secured a 
full-time role in business intelligence. His position now finds 

~ “Courotfe Spsorytin g Kansas City. 
him analyzing trends in ticket sales, monitoring developments 
in the business marketplace, and investigating how best to 

reach and meet the business needs of current and prospective partners. In addition, his role 
intersects with all aspects of marketing and content for the club, helping to find and promote the 
best-performing content through the right channels. 

“The ‘Moneyball’ movement came to sports on the field but is becoming even more important 
within the business realm,” Jenkins said. “Companies and individuals are only becoming more 
discerning with where their dollars are spent and how those spends are justified after the fact. 
Understanding and being able to communicate key metrics to a wide variety of stakeholders will 
only become more important as time goes on.” 

Jenkins also emphasized that students must be purposeful about their professional preparation. 
“Use your time as a student wisely! There are many free classes and programs that are only 

available to students. Tap into your alumni network and look on LinkedIn at people who have jobs 
that may appeal to you in the future, and reach out. You would be surprised how willing people 
are to discuss their path and job to you when you are a student. Do your best to garner some 
technical expertise, but most of all develop your curiosity. If you know the right questions to ask, 
you can always teach yourself how to collect and analyze the data you need to get your answer.” 

Wrap-Up 
The sport management professions offer a broad careers often hold jobs that are interesting because 
range of exciting career opportunities for qualified of the variety they offer, exciting because of the 
persons. In areas ranging from sporting goods activities they involve, and challenging because of 
retailing to commercial bowling, sport managers the ever-changing nature of the field. As a result, 
in managerial and administrative positions look to many sport management professionals report high 
hire people with a sport management education, levels of job satisfaction. If you are looking for a 
work experience, professionalism, volunteerism, fulfilling job and have a keen interest in sport, the 
networking, leadership, a good work ethic, and sport management professions may be for you. 
a positive attitude. People in sport management 



Chapter 15 |C areers in Sport Management 

-MORE INFORMATION ON CAREERS IN SPORT MANAGEMENT 
Organizations 

North American Society for Sport Management (NASSM) 
Sport Marketing Association 

Journals 
Athletic Business 

Athletic Management 

Case Studies in Sport Management 

International Journal of Sport Communication 

International Journal of Sport Management 

Journal of Applied Sport Management 

Journal of Intercollegiate Sport 

Journal of Legal Aspects of Sport 

Journal of Sport Management 

Recreational Sports Journal 

Sport Marketing Quarterly 

Street & Smith’s SportsBusiness Journal 

2AM DS/0/0UES9 LOR Ss 2S  ae  ieee  ee 
1. Discuss the breadth of the sport industry and the related career opportunities with specific 

reference to the industry segments discussed in this chapter. 

2. Explain how each of the following would help a person succeed in the sport industry: (a) 
communication skills, (b) leadership skills, (c) practical experience, (d) a mentor. 

3. What type of course work and related academic content are provided by a good sport 
management program? 

4. Identify three functional areas in the sport industry, and elaborate on the types of jobs that 
might be specific to those professional roles. 

5. Identify two existing sport organizations for each segment of the sport industry. 

6. Elaborate on the type of sport management job you would be most attracted to and why. 

Fa ae é 
LS ~ KPrope |» ) Go to HKPropel to complete the activities for this chapter. 






ability—Genetically endowed perceptual, cogni- biomechanics—Subdiscipline of kinesiology that 
tive, motor, metabolic, or personality trait that is applies the principles of mechanics to document 
susceptible to little or no modification by practice and explain the motions of living things. 
or training. 

burnout—State of extreme mental, emotional, and 
academic learning time—Time in which students physical exhaustion that results from chronic 
are actively participating and learning. stress. 

activities of daily living (ADLs)—Physical activ- cardiac output—Amount of blood pumped out of 
ities in the sphere of self-sufficiency that involve one side of the heart per minute. 
personal grooming, dressing, eating, walking, and cardiopulmonary rehabilitation—Exercise pro- 
using the toilet. gram designed to improve the function of the 

advertising—Information placed in the media by heart, lungs, and vascular system. 
an identified sponsor that pays for the time or carpal tunnel syndrome—Cumulative trauma 
space. disorder that affects the hand and wrist and is 

aerobic—Involving metabolism in the presence usually suffered by carpenters, typists, packers, 
of oxygen. assembly line workers, and others who repeat 

aesthetic experience—Subjective experience in the same movements for several hours each day. 

which sensations appeal to a person’s sense of choking—Sudden or progressive deterioration of 
beauty, grace, or artistic appreciation. performance below the typical and expected level 

anaerobic—Involving metabolism in the absence of expertise for a person performing under pres- 

of oxygen. sure, wherein the person is seemingly incapable 
of regaining control over his or her performance. 

anemia—Condition marked by hemoglobin con- 
centration below 12 grams per deciliter in women clinical setting—Health or fitness facility that 

and below 13 grams per deciliter in men. operates within a hospital or medical facility. 

anxiety—Intense, unpleasant feeling that typically closed skill—Motor skill in which the performer 

results from a demand or threat. must coordinate his or her movements with a 
predictable, usually stationary environment. 

arousal—State of bodily energy or physical and 
mental readiness. code of ethical principles and standards—Set of 

guidelines typically published and disseminated 
athletic training clinic—Health care facility that 

by a professional association to its members to 
specializes in serving athletes and is usually 

ensure that the welfare of clients always receives 
associated with a high school, collegiate, or pro- 

top priority from practitioners. 
fessional team. 

cognitive skills—Human capacities that require 
attitude—Relatively stable mind-set regarding, for 

complex modes of thought, including rational 
our purposes, physical activity. analysis and problem solving, in order to achieve 

autotelic attitude—Attitude characteristic of predetermined goals; essential for most profes- 
experiences whose value lies in the doing G.e., sionals. 
in which the activity is an end in itself); typically 

cohesion—Tendency for groups to stick together 
held by individuals who are intrinsically moti- 

and remain united in pursuing goals. 
vated. 

community setting—Health or fitness facility that 
axiology—Branch of philosophy that examines 

operates within a community center, church, or 
values, the purpose of human existence, and the 

other nonprofit organization (e.g., YMCA, Jewish 
nature of the good life. Community Center). 

biochemistry—Chemistry of living organisms. 

47 



me 418 Glossary 

competition—Principle or framework for organiz- emotion—Subjective feelings, such as anger, 

ing physical activity in which participants com- fear, joy, and sorrow that are related to personal 

pare their performances either with each other's experiences. 

or with a standard for the purpose of increasing employee assistance program—Program sup- 
enjoyment. ported by business or industry to help employees 

concentric—A muscle action where activated mus- with personal problems that may affect their work 
cle(s) create a torque greater than the resistance performance. 
torque resulting in whole muscle shortening. engaged time—Time that students spend engaged 

conditioning—Temporary end state of training in activity. 
that is reflected in the performer’s possession of epistemology—Branch of philosophy concerned 
an adequate level of strength, endurance, and with how we know things and the foundations 
flexibility to carry out desired tasks. on which such knowledge rests. 

cosmetic exercise—Physical training to change ergonomist—Engineer who seeks to improve 
body shape for primarily aesthetic reasons. the safety and efficiency of work by analyzing 

cumulative trauma disorder—Injury in a muscle, workers’ movements and workplace conditions. 
tendon, nerve, or ligament brought about by ethics—Branch of philosophy that analyzes right 
repetitive motion of a body part. behavior and individuals’ responsibilities toward 

custodial care facility—Long-term care facility that others and themselves. 
caters to the medical, rehabilitative, and special- event management—Planning, organizing, execu- 
ized needs of patients, including assistance with tion, and evaluation of events (e.g., Super Bowl, 
activities of daily living. Little League baseball tournament). 

dance—Involves body movements, often timed evidence-based practice—A formal system of 
to music, that express messages, emotions, or evaluating and integrating scientific and profes- 
artistic values. sional knowledge with client beliefs to inform 

deductive reasoning—Method of reflection that professional services. 
starts with one or more broad premises and moves exercise—Physical activity intended to improve 
toward specific conclusions. one’s physical performance in an activity, to 

descriptive reasoning—Method of reflection that improve one’s health, or to regain performance that 
involves looking at one example of an event and has been reduced as a result of injury or disease. 
describing its essential qualities. exercise physiology—Subdiscipline of kinesiology 

discipline—Organized body of knowledge con- that focuses on the physiology of physical activity. 
sidered worthy of study and usually pursued in experience of physical activity—Training in, 
a college or university curriculum. observation of, practice of, or participation in 

disposition—Short-term, highly variable psycho- physical activity. 
logical state that may affect one’s enjoyment of expressive movement—Movement used in a phys- 
physical activity. ical activity as a way of expressing one’s emotion 

distribution—Process of connecting a sport prod- or personality; differentiated from instrumental 
uct or service with the ultimate consumer. movement. 

dualism—When applied to the nature of persons, extrinsic motivation—Motivation derived from 
a doctrine that emphasizes the radical distinctive- pursuing and obtaining rewards (e.g., money, 
ness and independence of mind and body. status) outside of an activity itself. 

dynamometer—A machine used to measure mus- face-to-face contact activity—Contests (e.g., 
cular force or torque. football, wrestling, basketball, soccer) in which 

eccentric—A muscle action where activated mus- individuals interact with opponents’ attempts to 
cle(s) create a torque less than the resistance achieve a goal by physically manipulating their 
torque resulting in whole muscle lengthening. opponents’ movements. 

electromyography (EMG)—System for amplifying face-to-face noncontact activity—Contests (e.g., 
and recording electrical activity in muscles. volleyball, tennis, baseball) in which individuals 

interact with oppo
emblem—Body movement (e.g., hand signal) that nents to maximize their own 

chances of winni
can be translated easily into explicit messages. ng but do not physically manip- 

ulate their opponents. 



Glossary 

feedback (intrinsic and extrinsic)—Information helping profession—Profession primarily com- 
about movement that is provided to a learner, mitted to providing services. 
either during or after a movement, which may hemoglobin—Iron-containing protein found in 
derive from either an external source (e.g., red blood cells that carries most of the oxygen 
instructor, video footage) or an internal source in the blood. 
(e.g., muscles, joints, nervous system). 

holism—When applied to the nature of persons, 
financial management—Financial activities such a position that underscores the interdependence 

as prudent investment and use of assets, monetary and interrelatedness of thought and physicality. 
development opportunities, and short-term and 
long-term budgeting. home maintenance activities—Activities in the 

 
sphere of self-sufficiency intended to improve or 

flow—An optimal mental state characterized by 
repair living conditions in one’s home. 

total absorption in a task. 
human agency—Concept suggesting that people 

focus group—Group interview conducted to learn are actively involved in developing or constructing 
about people’s shared understandings through their own sports. 
organized discussion with selected individuals 

human factors engineer—Engineer who seeks 
about their views and experiences; used for both 

to improve the safety and efficiency of work by 
sociological research and marketing purposes. 

analyzing workers’ movements and workplace 
free time—Personal time that has not been conditions. 
encumbered with obligations; also referred to as 

human resource management—An important 
discretionary time. 

area of sport management that involves recruiting, 
functional learning time—See academic learning orienting, retaining, and evaluating employees; 
time. planning benefit programs; and designing and 

fundamental movement pattern—Broad category implementing internal grievance procedures. 
of human movement (e.g., running, throwing, hyperplasia—Increase in muscle mass due to 
kicking, jumping) used for a general purpose. splitting of muscle fibers. 

game spectator knowledge—Knowledge of ele- hypertrophy—Increase in muscle mass due to 
ments of the game one is watching, including enlargement of muscle fibers. 
players, strategies, and competitive tactics. 

hypokinetic disease—Disease (e.g., obesity, high 
gender—Social position based on a set of norms blood pressure, heart disease) associated directly 
or expectations about how we should behave that with low levels of daily physical activity. 
are linked to societal understandings of sexuality 

hypothermia—Condition in which body tempera- 
and procreation. 

ture falls below 95 degrees Fahrenheit (35 degrees 
gesture—Movement that is used to communicate Celsius), which causes heart rate and metabolism 
one’s intentions and may be classified as an illus- to slow and can be life threatening. 
trator, emblem, or regulator. 

illustrator—Gesture used to demonstrate or com- 
habilitation—Processes and treatments leading to plement what is said. 
acquisition of skills and functions that are consid- 

imagery—lInvocation of the senses to create or 
ered normal and expected for an individual of a 

re-create an experience in the mind. 
particular age and status. 

impersonal competition—Attempt by an individ- 
habilitative therapeutic exercise—Processes 

ual to better an established record in a physical 
and treatments leading to acquisition of skills 

activity (e.g., mountain climbing, long-distance 
and functions that are considered normal and 

swimming) that does not involve an opponent. 
expected for an individual of a certain age, status, 

inductive reasoning—Method of reflection that 
and occupation. 

starts with specific cases or examples and moves 
health-related exercise—Exercise undertaken to 

toward broad, general conclusions. 
develop or maintain a sound working body. 

inpatient facility—Rehabilitation hospital, nursing 
health-related fitness—Fitness developed through 

home, or other institution where patients spend 
physical activity experience and characterized by extended periods of time in order to receive med- 
capacities and traits associated with low risk of 

ical or other health-related treatment. 
hypokinetic disease. 



Mm 420 Glossary 

instrumental activities of daily living (ADLs)— leisure studies—Area of study, or department in 

Activities in the sphere of self-sufficiency (e.g., a college or university, that focuses on preparing 

shopping, telephoning, cooking, doing laundry) individuals for careers in the leisure industry. 

that are less personal than activities of daily living. liberal studies—Area of study regarded as forming 

instrumental movement—Movement used in a the core of higher education and inducing stu- 
physical activity to accomplish the goal of the dents to love the truth and develop independence 

action; differentiated from expressive movement. in thought and action; also known as the liberal 

International Classification of Functioning, arts and sciences. 

Disability, and Health—Diagnostic approach marketing management—Production, pricing, 
developed by the World Health Organization that promotion, and distribution of a sport-related 
focuses on patient needs and considers environ- product or service in a way that inspires trans- 
mental factors in order to maximize function. actions between the sport organization and its 

internship—Culminating educational experience, consumers. 

undertaken by a kinesiology major who plans materialism—Position on human nature that 
on a professional career, that involves extended views the person as being made of only one 
work at one or two professional sites where the thing: atoms. 
student works under supervision provided by a maximal oxygen uptake or vo ,max—Highest rate 
veteran professional. of oxygen uptake during heavy dynamic exercise. 

interpersonal skill—Skill that enables one to mechanical, market-driven professionalism— 
listen to and communicate with clients, students, Mode of practice that prioritizes technique, 
or patients. methodology, profit, and prestige over clients’ 

intrinsic motivation—Motivation derived from an wants and needs. 
activity’s inherent rewards, such as enjoyment or memory drum theory—Theory developed by 
feelings of accomplishment. Franklin Henry (1960) proposing that rapid and 

isokinetic—Muscle action involving quasi-constant well-learned movements are not consciously 
joint angular velocity. controlled but are run off automatically (as an 

isometric—Muscle action involving tension pro- older computer uses a memory drum to store 

duced by muscle groups that equals opposing and retrieve data). 

resistance and does not result in any change in mentor—Professional who provides less expe- 
joint angle. rienced professionals or preprofessionals with 

isotonic—Involving muscle action to move a con- learning opportunities, responsibilities, knowl- 

stant external (usually gravitational) load. edge, and contacts who can help them attain a 
successful career or continue to improve in an 

kinematics—Branch of mechanics that describes 
existing career. 

and measures movement in terms of variables 
such as velocity and acceleration. merchandising—Selling of goods and services 

related to an organization (e.g., team apparel, 
kinesiology—Discipline or body of knowledge 

coffee mugs, notepads), which gives sport man- 
that studies human physical activity. 

agers Opportunities to generate revenue and 
kinesiology theory—Theoretical knowledge about enhance brand image, brand loyalty, and customer 
physical activity as embodied in the subdisciplines satisfaction. 
of kinesiology. 

metabolic rate—Rate at which the body uses 
learning—Permanent alteration in nervous system energy. 
functioning that enables performers to consis- 

metaphysics—Branch of philosophy concerned 
tently achieve a predetermined goal. 

with the nature of reality (i.e., what exists). 
leisure—State of being in which humans find deep 
satisfaction and contentment, often accompanied mindfulness—Maintaining focus on the present 

in an open, nonjudgmental way. 
by feelings of wonder, celebration, excitement, 
and creativity. modernization theory—Theory positing that the 

rise of modern sport occ
leisure activity—Physical activity that nourishes urred during the Industrial 

or maintains the disposition of leisure. Revolution as U.S. society shifted away from an agri- 



Glossary 

cultural and local orientation and developed city- physical fitness—Capacity developed through 
based industries rooted in science and technology. exercise that enables one to perform essential 

motivation—Complex set of internal and external activities of daily living, engage in an active leisure 
forces that influence individuals to behave in lifestyle, and have sufficient energy remaining to 
certain ways. meet the demands of unexpected events. 

motor performance fitness—Capacity developed physical performance capacity—Qualities of 
through physical activity experience that enables physical capacity such as flexibility, muscu- 
people to perform daily activities with vigor and lar endurance, cardiovascular endurance, and 

often incorporates an element of skill. strength that are developed not through learning 

motor skill—Human act that requires efficient, but through training. 

coordinated movement to achieve a predeter- plasma volume—Volume of extracellular fluid in 

mined goal; relied on, along with cognitive skills, the blood. 

by some professionals (e.g., dentists, surgeons). postmodernism—A late 20th-century philosophy 

motor skill taxonomy—Classification system characterized by skeptical rejection of objective 

that categorizes motor skills according to their reason, realism, and objectivity. For example, in 

common critical components. history, postmodernism acknowledges the biases 
and power dynamics inherent in relaying his- 

movement—Any change in the position of body 
torical information and therefore contends that 

parts relative to each other. 
there can be no single or correct interpretation 

muscular endurance—Ability of a muscle to of the past. 
repeatedly exert force over a prolonged period. 

practice—Type of physical activity experience 
myofibril—The part of a muscle fiber that contains that involves cognitive processing and leads to 
contractile elements. improvement in skill (earning); repetition of a 

novel learning task—Movement task with which task, often with an instructor’s guidance or feed- 
the subject does not have prior experience and back, to promote learning. 
which usually involves simple movement (e.g., practice theory—Knowledge about clients, meth- 
linear positioning or tracking). ods, and outcomes that guides practitioners in 

open skill—Motor skill in which the performer performing their duties as professionals. 
must coordinate movements with an unpredict- practitioners—Those who use knowledge to 
able (usually moving) environment. bring about predetermined objectives (e.g., pro- 

outpatient facility—Short-term care facility where fessionals). 
patients do not stay overnight. prehabilitation—Therapy that occurs following an 

perception—Meaningful construct or message injury but before surgery in order to develop as 
based on interpretation of sensations from sub- much strength and range of motion as possible. 
jective experience. private practice—Entrepreneurial venture in 

perceptual skilI—Skill that enables one to identify which a professional establishes his or her own 
and recognize problems in professional settings. workplace with its own client pool. 

personality—Unique blend of psychological char- professional experience in physical activity— 
acteristics and behavioral tendencies that make Source of kinesiology knowledge involving design 
an individual both different from and similar to and implementation of physical activity programs 
others. in kinesiology-related professions. 

phenomenology—Method of reflection that program management—Activities (e.g., schedul- 

examines the content of consciousness and gives ing, equipment maintenance) that sport organiza- 

credence to differences encountered in normal tions must perform in order to ensure operational 

subjective life. effectiveness. 

physical activity—Movement that is voluntary, promotion—Activity (e.g., personal selling, sales 

intentional, and directed toward an identifiable promotion, advertising, publicity) designed to 

goal. attract consumers to products or services. 

physical activity experience—Source of kinesiol- psychological inventory—Standardized or objec- 

ogy knowledge involving direct personal experi- tive measure of a specific sample of behavior, 

ence of watching or performing physical activity. typically in the form of a questionnaire. 



mm 422 Glossary 

public relations management—Tasks in areas sarcopenia—Loss of skeletal muscle. 
such as media relations and community relations scholarship of physical activity—Source of 
that are designed to achieve positive relationships kinesiology knowledge derived from systematic 
between a sport organization and its most import- research and study of the theoretical and practical 
ant constituents. aspects of physical activity. 

reaction time—Speed of response to a light or self-reflection—Process of considering the subjec- 
sound, as when pressing a single button after tive experience of an activity performed in the past. 
seeing a signal (simple) or choosing one of mul- 

sensation—Raw, uninterpreted information col- 
tiple buttons to press depending on which signal 

lected through sensory Organs. 
one sees (choice). 

sensation-seeking activity—Physical activity 
receptor—Specialized nerve ending that is found at 

involving high speed, danger, or disorientation 
the end of a sensory neuron and detects changes 

of the body in space. 
in the environment. 

service—Human acts intended to improve quality 
recreation—See /eisure studies. 

of life for others. 
reframing—Choosing to look at something in a 

side-by-side competitive activity—Contest (e.g., 
more productive way or creating an alternative 

golf, swim racing) in which individuals do not 
way to interpret an event or feeling. 

interact directly in striving to accomplish the goal. 
regulator—Hand or body movement used to guide 

skill—Quality of physical activity ability that under- 
the flow of conversation, as in greeting someone 

lies the performance of a movement. 
or parting company. 

social loafing—Decrease in individual perfor- 
rehabilitation—Physical treatment, exercise, and 

mance within a group. 
educational or counseling sessions that lead a 
person to regain function and a personally accept- social trustee, civic professional—Professional 

able level of independence. who adheres to the creed “Healthy people and a 
good society first. Myself and my profession second 

rehabilitative therapeutic exercise—Processes 
in service of this greater good” (Lawson, 1998a). 

and treatments designed to restore skills or func- 
tions that were previously acquired but have been spheres of professional practice—Categories of 

lost due to disease, injury, or behavioral traits. physical activity professions that are similar with 
respect to general objectives, methods, educa- 

research and development—Physical activity 
tional requirements, working environments, and 

and sport businesses sometimes invest in private 
other factors. 

research to develop more effective and attractive 
equipment and services. sport—Physical activity in which movement is 

performed in order to achieve a specific goal in 
retention-based facility—Commercial (for-profit) 

a manner specified by established rules and in 
health or fitness facility that makes a large percent- 

competitive contexts. 
age of its profit from ongoing monthly membership 
dues and engages in activities directed at helping sport entertainment—Sport industry sector con- 

members meet their goals and have a positive sisting of organizations that seek to attract con- 

experience in the facility so that they will continue sumers to watch athletes compete (e.g., NASCAR, 

to pay for membership on a monthly basis. NFL, NCAA institutions). 

risk management—Prevention of loss associ- sport industry—“Market in which the products 
ated with inadequacy in areas such as financial offered to its buyers are fitness, sport, recreation, 

planning, employee management, facility and and leisure related . . . [and] include goods (e.g. 

equipment maintenance, customer service, and baseball bats), services (e.g., sport marketing, 
short- and long-term planning. health clubs), people (e.g., professional players), 

places (e.g., golf courses), and ideas” (Pitts, Field- 
sales-based facility—Commercial (for-profit) 

ing, & Miller, 1994, p. 18). 
health or fitness facility that makes a large per- 
centage of its profit from membership initiation sport management—Subdiscipline of kinesiology 
fees and prepaid dues and therefore lacks signif- focused on the “study and practice of all people, 
icant incentive to satisfy current members and, activities, businesses, or organizations involved in 

in turn, may be marked by overcrowding and producing, facilitating, promoting, or organizing 
lower-quality programs and services. any sport-related business or product” (Pitts & 

Stotlar, 2007, p. 4). 



Glossary 423 

sport pedagogy—Subdiscipline of kinesiology therapeutic exercise—Exercise and movement 
that studies the teaching and learning of physical applied in a systematic and scientific manner 
activity, primarily in physical education. in order to restore or develop health-related 

sport promotion—See promotion. movement performance factors such as muscular 

sport services—Sport industry sec strength, endurance, and flexibility; neuromuscu- 
tor consisting of 

businesses that provide needed s lar coordination; and cardiovascular efficiency. 
ervices to other 

sport organizations (e.g., event management, tidal volume—Amount of air inhaled or exhaled 

representation services). per breath. 

sports medicine—Field of medicine and thera- torque—Common English term for “moment of 
peutic exercise that specializes in treating, pre- force” that is the rotation effect of a force about 
venting, and rehabilitating athletes (and others an axis of rotation. Joint torques measured by 
who engage in sport or strenuous exercise) and isokinetic dynamometers are particularly good 

investigates training methods and practices. measures of muscular strength. 

sport spectacle—Staged competition designed training—Physical activity carried out for the 

and promoted for an audience and intended to express purpose of improving athletic, military, 

evoke a range of human emotions by virtue of its work-related, or recreation-related performance. 

grandeur, scale, and drama. underwater weighing—Procedure in which a 

sport sponsorship—Physical activity and sport person’s body weight is measured while he or 

organizations establish external partnerships with she is completely submerged in water in order 

organizations seeking promotion via the activity, to determine body volume. 

sport, or event. ventilation—Process in which gases are exchanged 

strength—Maximal moment of force exerted by between the atmosphere and the alveoli of the 

a muscle group, typically measured in isokinetic lungs. 

conditions. ventilatory threshold—Point during a graded 

stress—Process in which an individual perceives exercise test at which ventilation begins increas- 

an imbalance between situational demands and ing at a faster rate than VO, does. 

his or her response capabilities. venue—Facility (e.g., arena, stadium, track) in 

stroke volume—Amount of blood pumped out of which sport competitions or activities occur. 

one side of the heart per beat. vertigo—Sensation resulting from disorientation of 

subdiscipline—Division that represents an exten- the body in space, experienced often in conjunc- 

sion of an established discipline such as psychol- tion with dangerous activities and differing from 

ogy, physiology, or history; way of dividing the the medical conditions that result in dizziness. 

scholarly study of physical activity in order to wellness—An active, self-directed process of 
facilitate teaching and research. making choices to achieve a multidimensionally 

subjective experience—Individual reactions, feel- healthy and fulfilling life. 

ings, and thoughts about events. with-it-ness—Teacher awareness of all events 

subjective experience of physical activity— transpiring in a learning environment. 

Individual reactions, feelings, and thoughts that workplace knowledge—Practical, mundane 
accompany either performance or observation of knowledge that is not grounded in theory and 

physical activity. that people use to perform everyday tasks in the 

technical definition—Specialized meaning of a workplace (e.g., knowing where items are stored 

term (e.g., physical activity) that is used to convey or how to clean, repair, or calibrate equipment). 

knowledge to others within a scientific or techni- 

cal field and differs from how people define and 
use the term in everyday language. 



Pn fs 

i + FOE 
’ wiFgiewe . 

TL a! 
pre © 

er ee 

‘that 
Tere & 
ee | 

re ori 
s,lebectagel 

IE : és puis . 
> y — a 

i 
: a +, 

~ bye dw) vuleeriaed 

‘= aha 

ry poe lioei im, 
+ coven yl? Gaal 

a 



Part | Knudson, D.V. (2021). Fundamentals of biomechanics 

Epstein, J. (1976, July). Obsessed with sport. Harper's (3rd ed.). Springer Science. 

Magazine, 253-255. Mahar, M., & Crenshaw, J.T. (2015). AKA Salary Survey 

Sheehan, G.A. (1978). Running and being: The total 2015. American Kinesiology Association. 

experience. Warner Books, National Academy of Kinesiology. (2021). Kinesiology: 
The discipline and related professions. https://nation 

Chapter 1 alacademyofkinesiology.org/SubPages/Pages/What%20 
is%20Kinesiology 

Alvarez-Bueno, C., Pesce, C., Cavero-Redondo, I., San- 
chez-Lopez, M., Martinez-Hortelano, J. A., & Marti- Newell, K.M. (1990a). Kinesiology: The label for the 

nez-Vizcaino, V. (2017). The effect of physical activity study of physical activity in higher education. Quest, 

interventions on children’s cognition and metacogni- 42(3), 269-278. 

tion: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal Newell, K.M. (1990b). Physical activity, knowledge types, 
of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psy- and degree programs. Quest, 42(3), 243-268. 
chiatry, 509), 729-738. Noehren, B., Scholz, J., & Davis, I. (2011). The effect of 

American Kinesiology Association. (2021). About AKA. real-time gait retraining on hip kinematics, pain, and 
www.americankinesiology.org/SubPages/Pages/About function in subjects with patellofemoral pain syndrome. 

British Journal of Sports Medicine, 45(9), 691-606. 
Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine (2020). CEBM. 

www.cebm.net/ Quarrie, K.L., Gianotti, S.M., Hopkins, W.G., & Hume, 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2015). Glos- P.A. (2007). Effect of nationwide injury prevention 

sary of terms. www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity/basics/ programme on serious spinal injuries in New Zealand 
rugby union. British Medical Journal, 334(7604), 

glossary/index.htm. 
1150-1153. 

Donnelly, J.E., Hillman, C.H., Castelli, D., Etnier, J.L., Lee, 
Quarrie, K. et al. (2020). RugbySmart: Challenges and 

S., Tomporowski, P., Lambourne, K., & Szabo-Reed, A.N. 
lessons from the implementation of a nationwide sports 

(2016). Physical activity, fitness, cognitive function, and 
injury prevention partnership programme. Sports Med- 

academic achievement in children: A systematic review. 
icine, 50(2), 227-230. 

Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 48(6), 1197. 
Sherrington, C.S. (1940). Man on his nature. Cambridge 

Elliott, B.C., & Khangure, M. (2002). Disk degeneration 
University Press. 

and fast bowling in cricket: An intervention study. 
Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 3411), Thomas, J.R. (2014). The public face of kinesiology in 

1714-1718. the 21st century. Quest, 66(3), 313-321. 

Harris, J.C. (1993). Using kinesiology: A comparison of Wojciechowska, I. (2010, August). A quickly growing 

the applied veins in the subdisciplines. Quest, 45(3), major. Inside Higher Education, www. insidehighered. 

390-412. com/news/2010/08/11/kinesiology 

Herman, D.C., Onate, J.A., Weinhold, P.S., Guskiewicz, Zeigler, E.F. (1990). Don’t forget the profession when 

K.M., Garrett, W.E., Yu, B., & Padua, D.A. (2009). The choosing a name! In Corbin, C.B., & Eckert, H.M. (Eds.) 

effects of feedback with and without strength training The evolving undergraduate major: American Acad- 

on lower extremity biomechanics. American Journal emy of Physical Education Papers No. 23 (pp. 07-77). 

of Sports Medicine, 37(7), 1301-1308. Human Kinetics. 

Hewett, T.E., Lindenfield, T.N., Riccobene, J.V., & Noyes, 

ER. (1999). The effect of neuromuscular training on Chapter 2 

the incidence of knee injury in female athletes. A pro- Alberton, C.L., Pinto, C.C., Gorski, T., Antunes, A.H., 

spective study. American Journal of Sports Medicine, Finatto, P., Cadore, E.L. et al. (2016). Rating of perceived 
27(6), 699-706. exertion in maximal incremental tests during head- 

out water-based aerobic exercises. Journal of Sports 
Knudson, D.V. (2013). Qualitative diagnosis of human 

movement (3rd ed.). Human Kinetics. Sciences, 34(18), 1691-1698. 

Atkinson, G. (2004). Effects of music on work-rate distri- 
Knudson, D.V. (2019). Kinesiology’s tower of babel: 

Advancing the field with consistent nomenclature. bution during a cycling time trial. International Journal 
of Sports Medicine, 25(8), 611-015. 

Quest, 71(1), 42-50. 

435 



MH 426 References 

Bernstein, N. (1967). The coordination and regulation son, J.L. (2010). Parent and child physical activity and 

of movements. Pergamon. sedentary time: Do active parents foster active children? 
BMC Public Health, 10(1), 194-202. 

Bick, A., Burggermann, B., & Fuchs-Schundeln, N. (2016, 
August). Hours worked in Europe and the US: New data, Kalakanis, L., Goldfield, G.S., Paluch, R.A., & Epstein, 

new answers. IZA DP No. 10197. Institute for the Study L.H. (2001). Parental activity as a determinant of activity 

of Labor. http://fit/iza.org/dp10179.pdf level and patterns of activity in obese children. Research 
Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 72(3), 202-209. 

Brill, PRA., Burkhaulter, H.E., Kohl, H.W., Blair, S.N., & 
Goodyear, N.N. (1989). The impact of previous athleti- Katz, S., Ford, A.B., Moskowitz, R.W., Jackson, B.A., & 

cism on exercise habits, physical fitness, and coronary Jaffe, M.W. (1963). Studies of illness in the aged: The 
heart disease risk factors in middle-aged men. Research index of ADL: A standardized measure of biological 
Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 60(3), 209-215. and psychological function. Journal of the American 

Carroll,J .( 2007). Workers’ average round-trip is 46 min- Medical Association, 185(12), 914-919. 

utes in a typical day. Gallup News Service. King, A.C., Blair, $.N., Bild, D., Dishman, R.K., Dubbert, 
P.M., Marcus, B.H., Oldridge, N.B., Paffenbarger, R.S., 

Cauley, J.A., Donfield, S.M., LaPorte, R.E., & Warhaftig, 
N.E. (1991). Physical activity by socioeconomic status Powell, K.E., & Yeager, K.Y. (1992). Determinants of 

physical activity and interventions in adults. Medicine 
in two population based cohorts. Medicine and Science 
in Sports and Exercise, 23(3), 343-352. and Science in Sports and Exercise, 24(6), 221-8230. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2012). Kirby, J., Levin, K.A., & Inchley, J. (2011). Parental and 

Physical activity facts. www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/ peer influences on physical activity among Scottish 

physicalactivity/facts.htm adolescents: A longitudinal study. Journal of Physical 
Activity and Health, 8(6), 785-793. 

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2014). 
National health expenditures 2015 highlights. www. Kroemer, K.H.E. (2017). Fitting the human: Introduction 

cms.gov/research-statistics-data-and-systems/statis to ergonomics/human factors engineering (7th ed.). 

tics-trends-and-reports/nationalhealthexpenddata/ CRC Press. 

downloads/highlights.pdf Kroemer, K., Kroemer, H., & Kroemer-Elbert, K. (1994). 

Cleland, V., Dwyer, T., & Venn, A. (2012). Which domains Ergonomics: How to design for ease and efficiency. 

of childhood physical activity predict physical activity in Prentice Hall. 

adulthood? A 20-year prospective tracking study. British Kucera, K.L., Klossner, D., Colgate, B., & Cantu, R.C. 
Journal of Sports Medicine, 46(8), 595-602. (2016). Annual survey off ootball injury research: 1931- 

De Grazia, S. (1962). Of time, work, and leisure. Dou- 2015. National Center for Catastrophic Sport Injury 

bleday. Research. nccsir.unc.edu/reports 

Dishman, R.K., & Sallis, J.F. (14994). Determinants and Loy, J.W., McPherson, B.D., & Kenyon, G. (1978). Sport 

interventions for physical activity and exercise. In and social systems. Addison-Wesley. 

C. Bouchard, R.J. Shephard, & T. Stephens (Eds.), Macnamara, B.N., Hambrick, D.Z., & Oswald, E.L. (2014). 
Physical activity, fitness, and health: International Deliberate practice and performance in music, games, 
proceedings and consensus statement (pp. 214-238). sports, education, and professions: A meta-analysis. 
Human Kinetics. Psychological Science, 25(8), 1608-1618. 

Dong, N.L., Block, G., & Mandel, S. (2004, February 12). Macnamara, B.N., Moreau, D., & Hambrick, D.Z. (2016). 
Activities contributing to total energy expenditure in The relationship between deliberate practice and per- 
the United States: Results from the NHAPS study. /nter- formance in sports: A meta-analysis. Perspectives in 
national Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Psychological Science, 11(3), 333-350. 
Activity, 1, 4. https://doi.org/10.1186/1479-5868-1-4 Morris, J.N., & Crawford M.D. (1958). Coronary heart 

Ebihara, O., Ideda, M., & Myiashita, M. (1983). Birth order disease and physical activity of work. British Medical 
and children’s socialization into sport. International Journal, 2(5111), 1485-1496. 
Review of Sport Sociology, 183), 69-89. 

Morris, J.N., Heady, J.A., Raffle, PA.B., Roberts, C.G., & 
Ericsson, K.A., Krampe, R.T., & Tesch-R6mer, C. (1993). Parks, J.W. (1953). Coronary heart disease and physical 
The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of activity of work. Lancet, 2(5111), 1111-1120. 
expert performance. Psychological Review, 100(3), 

National Collegiate Athletic Association. (2010). Football 
363-400. 

injuries: Data from the 2004/05-2008-/09 seasons. 
Garcia, A.W., Broda, M.A.N., Frenn, M., Coviak, C., www.ncaa.org/sites/default/files/NCAA_Football_ 
Pender, N.J., & Ronis, D.L. (1995). Gender and devel- Injury_WEB.pdf 
opmental differences in exercise beliefs among youth 

National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. 
and prediction of their exercise behavior. Journal of 

(2000, June 1). Working women face high risk from work 
School Health, 65(6), 213-219. 

stress, musculoskeletal injuries, other disorders, NIOSH 
Jago, R., Fox, K.R., Page, A.S., Brockman, R., & Thomp- finds. www.cdc.gov/niosh/updates/womrisk.html 



References 427 

Nuzzo, J.L. (2020). The case for retiring flexibility as a Fairchild, D.L. (1987). Prolegomena to an expressive 
major component of physical fitness. Sports Medicine, function of sport. Journal of the Philosophy of Sport, 
50, 853-870. 14(1), 21-33. 

Pate, R.R. (1988). The evolving definition of fitness. Gleaves, J., & Lehrbach, T. (2016). Beyond fairness: The 
Quest, 40(3), 174-179. ethics of inclusion for transgender and intersex athletes. 

Pieper, J. (1952). Leisure: The basis of culture. Pantheon Journal of the Philosophy of Sport, 43(2), 311-326. 
Books. Hemphill, D. (2005). Cybersport. Journal of the Philoso- 

Reid, H.L. (2002). The philosophical athlete. Carolina phy of Sport, 32(2), 195-207. 
Academic Press. Herrigel, E. (1953). Zen in the art of archery. Routledge 

Safe Kids Worldwide. (2015). Sport and recreation safety and Kegan Paul. 

fact sheet 2015. www.safekids.org/sites/default/files/ Hopsicker, P.M., & Hochstetler, D. (2016). The future 
documents/skw_sports_fact_sheet_feb_2015.pdf of sport philosophy in higher education kinesiology. 

Sallis, J.R., & Hovell, M.G. (1990). Determinants of exer- Quest, 68(3), 240-256. 

cise behavior. Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews, Hurka, T. (1993). Perfectionism. Oxford University Press. 
18(1), 307-330. 

Hurka, T. (2011). The best things in life: A guide to what 
Sheehan, G. (1978). Running and being: The total expe- really matters. Oxford University Press. 
rience. Warner Books. 

Husserl, E. (1900/1970). Logical investigations, Vol. I. 
Simon, R.L. (2004). Fair play: The ethics of sport (2nd Translated by J.N. Findlay. Humanities Press. 

ed.). Westview Press. 
Jordan-Young, R., & Karkazis, K. (2019). Testosterone. 

Strieber, A. (2010). Jobs rated 2010: A ranking of 200 An unauthorized biography. Harvard University Press. 
Jobs best to worst. www.careercast.com/jobs-rated/jobs- Kretchmar, R.S. (1975). From test to contest: An analysis 
rated-2010-ranking-200-jobs-best-worst of two kinds of counterpoint in sport. Journal of the 

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2011). Nonfatal occu- Philosophy of Sport, 211), 23-30. 
pational injuries and illnesses requiring days away Kretchmar, R.S. (1994). Practical philosophy of sport. 
from work, 2010. www.bls.gov/news.release/archives/ Hunan Kinetics. 
osh2_11092011.pdf 

Kretchmar, R.S. (2004). Walking Barry Bonds: The ethics 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (1996). of the intentional walk. In E. Bronson (Ed.), Baseball 
Physical activity and health: A report of the surgeon and philosophy: Thinking outside the batter’s box (pp. 
general. U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser- 261-272). Open Court. 
vices, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and 

Kretchmar, R.S. (2005). Practical philosophy of sport and 
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and 

physical activity (2nd ed.). Human Kinetics. 
Health Promotion. 

Kretchmar, R.S. (2011). Philosophic research in physical 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (1997, 

activity. In J.R. Thomas & J.K. Nelson (Eds.), Research 
July). Musculoskeletal disorders and workplace fac- 

methods in physical activity (6th ed., pp. 235-251). 
tors—A critical review of epidemiologic evidence for 

Human Kinetics. 
work-related musculoskeletal disorders of the neck, 
upper extremity, and low back. B.P. Bernard (Ed.). Lasch, C. (1979). The culture of narcissism: American life 

National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. in an age of diminishing expectations. Warner Books. 

www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/97-141/ Loland, S. (2002). Fair play: A moral norm system. 

Warren, T.Y., Barry, V., Hooker, S.P., Xuemei, S., Church, Routledge. 

T.S., & Blair, S.N. (2010). Sedentary behaviors increase Meier, K. (1980). An affair of flutes: An appreciation of 
risk of cardiovascular disease mortality in men. Medi- play. Journal of the Philosophy of Sport, 7.1), 24-45. 
cine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 42(5), 879-885. Metheny, E. (1965). Connotations of movement in sport 

Zakarian, J.M., Hovell, M.F., Hofstettere, C.R., Sallis, J.F, and dance. Wm. C. Brown. 
& Keating, K.J. (1994). Correlates of vigorous exercise Metheny, E. (1968). Movement and meaning. McGraw-Hill. 
in a predominately low SES and minority high school 

Morgan, W. (1982). Play, utopia, and dystopia: Prologue 
population. Preventive Medicine, 23(4), 314-321. 

to a ludic theory of the state. Journal of the Philosophy 
of Sport, 9, 30-42. 

Chapter 3 Morgan, W.J. (1994). Leftist theories of sport: A critique 
Anderson, D. (2001). Recovering humanity: Movement, and reconstruction. University of Illinois Press. 
sport, and nature. Journal of the Philosophy of Sport, 

Mumford, S. (2012). Moderate partisanship as oscillation. 
28(2), 140-150. Sport, Ethics and Philosophy, 6(3), 309-75. 

Dixon, N. (2001). The ethics of supporting sport teams. 
Nagel, T. (1987). What does it all mean? A very short 

Journal of Applied Philosophy, 18(2), 149-58. 
introduction to philosophy. Oxford University Press. 



MH 428 References 

Parry,J .( 2019). E-sports are not sports. Sport, Ethics and (Eds.) Time out: Global perspectives on sport and the 

Philosophy, 13(1), 3-18. Covid-19 lockdown (pp. 99-107). Common Ground. 

Pieper, J. (1952). Leisure: The basis of culture. Pantheon Baker, W.J. (1986). Jesse Owens: An American life. The 

Books. Free Press. 

Simon, R., Torres, C.R., & Hager, P. (2015). Fair play: The Baker, W.J. (1988). Sports in the Western world. University 

ethics of sport (4th ed.). Westview Press. of Illinois Press. 

Slusher, H.S. (1967). Man, sport, and existence: A critical Berryman, J.W. (1973). Sport history as social history? 

analysis. Lea & Febiger. Quest, 20, 65-73. 

Suits, B. (1978). The grasshopper: Games, life, and utopia. Berryman, J.W. (1989). The tradition of the “six things 

University of Toronto Press. non-natural”: Exercise and medicine from Hippocrates 

Tannsjé, T. (1998). Is our admiration for sports heroes through ante-bellum America. Exercise and Sport Sci- 

fascistoid? Journal of the Philosophy of Sport, 20, 23-34. ences Reviews, 17, 515-559. 

Teetzel, S. (2006). On transgendered athletes, fairness, Betts, J.R. (1952). Organized sport in industrial America. 

and doping: An international challenge. Sport in Society: Dissertation Abstracts International, 12(1), 41. 

Cultures, Commerce, Media, Politics, 9(2), 227-251. Blair, S.N., Mulder, R.T., & Kohl, H.W. (1987). Reaction 

Torres, C. (2000). What counts as part of a game? A look to “Secular trends in adult physical activity: Exercise 

at skills. Journal of the Philosophy of Sport, 27(1), 81-92. boom or bust?” Research Quarterly for Exercise and 
Sport, 58(2), 106-110. 

Torres, C. (2002). Play as expression: An analysis based on 
the philosophy of Maurice Merleau-Ponty [Unpublished Booth, D. (2005). The field: Truth and fiction in sport 

doctoral dissertation]. Pennsylvania State University. history. Routledge. 

Torres, C. (2018). What counts as part of a game? Recon- Boyle, R.H. (1963). Sport—Mirror of American life. 

sidering skills. Journal of the Philosophy of Sport, 451), Little, Brown. 

1-21. Broughton, D., & Levin, A. (2020). NFL avg. atten- 

Torres, C. (2020). What is the value of pursuing optimal dance drops to lowest point since ’04. Sport Busi- 

athletic performance? Kinesiology Review, 9(1), 13-20. ness Daily. www.sportsbusinessdaily.com/Daily/ 
Issues/2020/01/03/Research-and-Ratings/NFL-Atten- 

Torres, C., & McLaughlin, D. (2003). Indigestion? An 
dance.aspx 

apology for ties. Journal of the Philosophy of Sport, 
30(2), 144-158. Cahn, S.K. (1994). Coming on strong: Gender and sex- 

uality in twentieth-century women’s sport. Harvard 
Wahlert, L., & Fiester, A. (2012). Gender transports: 

University Press. 
Privileging the “natural” in gender testing debates for 
intersex and transgender athletes. The American Jour- Cahn, S.K. (2014). Turn, turn, turn: There is a reason (for 

nal of Bioethics, 12(7), 19-21. sports history). Journal of American History, 101(1), 
181-183. 

Weiss, P. (1969). Sport: A philosophic inquiry. Southern 
Illinois University Press. Carey, A.R., & Mullins, M.E. (1997, June 16). Toning up. 

USA Today, p. 1C. 
Williams, J.F. (1930). Education through the physical. 
Journal of Higher Education, 1(5), 279-282. Commission on Accreditation of Athletic Training Edu- 

cation. (2014-2015). www.caate.net/becoming-an-ath 
letic-trainer/ 

Chapter 4 
Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS). (2019). CAS 

Adelman, M.L. (1986). A sporting time: New York City 
2018/0/5794 Mokgadi Caster Semenya v. International 

and the rise of modern athletics, 1820-70. University 
Association of Athletics Federation. Lausanne: Court of 

of Illinois Press. 
Arbitration for Sport. 

Adventure Cycling Association. (2016). Adventure cycling 
Dulles, FR. (1940). America learns to play: A history of 

route network. www.adventurecycling.org/routes-and- 
popular recreation. Appleton-Century. 

maps/adventure-cycling-route-network 
Eisen, G. (1995). Early European attitudes toward Native 

Allentuck, D., & Draper, K. (2019). Baseball saw a mil- 
American sports and pastime. In D. Wiggins & G. Eisen 

lion more empty seats. Does it matter? The New York 
(Eds.), Ethnicity and sport in North American history 

Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2019/ 09/29/sports/ 
and culture (pp. pp. 1-18). Greenwood Press. 

baseball/mlb-attendance.html 
Eitzen, D.S., & Sage, G.H. (1997). Sociology of North 

American Physical Therapy Association. (2016). Physi- 
American sport (6th ed.). Brown & Benchmark. 

cal therapist (PT) education overview. www.apta.org/ 
PTEducation/Overview/ Fisher, M. (2015, April 5). Baseball is struggling to hook 

kids—and risks losing fans to other sports. 
Andersson, K. (2021). Working out Covid-19: Being a Washing- 

ton Post. www.w
Les Mills instructor and managing health in times of ashingtonpost.com/sports/nationals/ 

baseballs-trouble-with-the-youth-curve-
quarantine. In J. Kreiger, A. Hennig, L. Piper, & P. Dimeo -and-what-that- 

means-for-the-game/2015/04/05/2da36dca 



References 429 

Futterman, M. (2011, March 31). Has baseball’s moment Krieger, J., Hennig, A., Piper, L., & Dimeo, P. (Eds.). 
passed? The Wall Street Journal, D11. (2021). Time out: Global perspectives on sport and the 

Gerber, E.W. (1971). Innovators and institutions in Covid-19 lockdown. Common Ground. 

physical education. Lea & Febiger. Lapchick, R. (2019). The 2019 racial and gender report 

Gorn, EJ., & Goldstein, W. (1993). A brief history of card: Major League Baseball. Tides: The Institute for 
American sports. Hill & Wang. Diversity and Ethics in Sport. University of Central Florida. 

Gorn, E.J. (1986). The manly art: Bare-knuckle prize Leonard, W.M. (1998). A sociological perspective of sport. 

Sighting in America. Cornell University Press. Allyn & Bacon. 

Guttmann, A. (1978). From ritual to record: The nature Levine, P. (1992). Ellis Island to Ebbets Field: Sport and the 

of modern sports. Columbia University Press. American Jewish experience. Oxford University Press. 

Guttmann, A. (1991). Women’s sports: A history. Columbia Lippi, G., Banfi, G., Favaloro, E., Rittweger,J .,& Maffulli, 

University Press. N. (2008). Updates on improvement of human athletic 
performance: Focus on world records in athletics. 

Hardy, S. (1982). How Boston played: Sport, recreation, 
British Medical Journal, 87, 7-15. 

and community 1865-1915. Northeastern University 
Press. Little League. (2018). Little League Baseball and Softball: 

Year in review. Little League International. www.little 
Hargreaves,J .( 1994). Sporting females: Critical issues in 

league.org/downloads/year-in-review/ 
the history and sociology of women’s sport. Routledge. 

Lucas, J.A., & Smith, R.A. (1978). Saga ofAmerican sport. 
Hartwell, E.M. (1887). On the physiology of exercise. 

Lea & Febiger. 
Boston Medical and Surgical Journal, 16(13), 297-302; 
16(14), 321-324. Massengale, J.D., & Swanson, R.A. (Eds.). (1997). The 

history of exercise and sport science. Human Kinetics. 
Hartwell, E.M. (1899). On physical training. Report of 
the commissioner of educatiofno r 1897-1898 (Vol. 1). Murphy, W. (1995). Healing the generations: A history of 

U.S. Government Printing Office. physical therapy and the American Physical Therapy 
Association. Greenwich. 

Henry, FM. (1964). Physical education: An academic 
discipline. Journal of Health, Physical Education, and National Center for Health Statistics. (2018). Exercise of 

Recreation, 35(7), 32-33, 69. physical activity. Accessed from www.cdc.gov/nchs/ 
fastats/exercise.htm 

IAAF. (2018). Eligibility regulationfsor  the female classi- 
fication (athletes with differences of sex development). National Coalition for Women & Girls in Education 

/www.worldathletics.org/news/press-release/eligibili (2012). Title IX and athletics: Proven benefits, 

ty-regulations-for-female-classifica unfounded objections. Accessed from www.ncwge.org/ 
TitleIX40/Athletics.pdf 

International Health, Racquet, and Sportsclub Associ- 
ation. (2019). IHRSA Global Report. www.ihrsa.org/ National Collegiate Athletic Association. (2017). NCAA 

about/media-center/press-releases/ihrsa-report-world research: 15-year trends in Division I athletics finances. 

wide-health-club-membership-now-183m-strong/ Accessed from https://ncaaorg.s3.amazonaws.com/ 
research/Finances/2020RES_D1-RevExp_Report.pdf 

Johnson, W.J. (1960). Science and medicine of exercise 
and sports. Harper. National Collegiate Athletic Association. (2018). Number of 

NCAA college athletes reaches all-time high. Accessed from 
Jones, C. (2020, November 5,). How P.E. teachers are 

http://www.ncaa.org/about/resources/media-center/ 
trying to get students off the couch during the pan- news/number-ncaa-college-athletes-reaches-all-time-high 
demic. EdSource: Highlighting Strategies for Student 
Success. Accessed from https://edsource.org/2020/ National Federation of State High School Associations. 

how-p-e-teachers-are-trying-to-get-students-off-the- (2019). Participation in high school sports registers 
first decline in 30 years. www.nfhs.org/articles/par 

couch-during-the-pandemic/642765 
ticipation-in-high-school-sports-registers-first-decline- 

Karpovich, P.V., Morehouse, L.E., Scott, M.G., & Weiss, 
in-30-years/ 

R.A. (Eds.). (1960). The contributions of physical activity 
National Park Service. (1979). Visitor use statistics. 

to human well-being. Research Quarterly, 31(2), part 
Fiscal year visitation report - Fiscal year 10/1/1978 to 

II [Special issue]. 
9/30/1979. https://irma.nps.gov/stats/reports/national/ 

King, B. (2015, August 10). Are the kids alright? Street 
National Park Service. (2019). National Park Visitation 

and Smith’s Sports Business Journal, 1. 
Tops 327 Million in 2019. Accessed May 4, 2021, https:// 

Kiuchi, Y., Dittmar, B., & Matteson, S. (2021). A unique 
www.nps.gov/orgs/1207/2019-visitation-numbers.htm 

and special solution for a unique and special time: 
North American Society for Sports Management (2019). 

Training professional football referees virtually. In J. 
Sport Management Programs: United States. Accessed 

Kreiger, A. Hennig, L. Piper, & P. Dimeo (Eds.), Time 
May 4, 2021, https://www.nassm.com/Programs/Aca 

out: Global perspectives on sport and the Covid-19 

lockdown (pp. 171-182). Common Ground. 
demicPrograms/United_States. 



BE 430 References 

Outdoor Foundation. 2019. Outdoor participation Rice, W.L., Mateer, T.J., Reigner, N., Newman, P., Lawhon, 

report. https://outdoorindustry.org/resource/2019-out B., & Taff, B.D. (2020). Changes in recreational behav- 

door-participation-report/ iors of outdoor enthusiasts during the COVID-19 
pandemic: Analysis across urban and rural commu- 

Oxedine, J.B. (1995). American Indian sports heritage. 
nities. Journal of Urban Ecology, 6(1), https://doi. 

University of Nebraska Press. 
org/10.1093/jue/juaa020 

Park, R.J. (1980). The Research Quarterly and its anteced- 
Riess, S. (1990). The new sport history. Reviews in Amer- 

ents. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 5101), 
ican History, 18(3), 311-325. 

1-22. 
Roberts, R. (1983). Papa Jack: Jack Johnson and the era 

Park, R.J. (1981). The emergence of the academic disci- 

pline of physical education in the United States. In G.A. of White hopes. The Free Press. 

Brooks (Ed.), Perspectives on the academic discipline Rudolph, F. (1962). The American college and university: 

of physical education (pp. 20-45). Human Kinetics. A history. Vintage. 

Park, R.J. (1987a). Physiologists, physicians, and physical Running USA. (2015). State of the sport - Annual mara- 
educators: Nineteenth century biology and exercise, thon report. www.runningusa.org/annualreports/ 
hygienic and educative. Journal of Sport History, 141), Running USA. (2019). U.S. running trends. www.run- 
28-60. ningusa.org/RUSA/News/2019/Running USA_Releas 

Park, R.J. (1987b). Sport, gender, and society in a trans- es_2019_U.S._Running_Trends_Report.aspx 
atlantic Victorian perspective. In J.A. Mangan & R,J. Schnitzer, M., Schottl, S.E, Knopp, M., & Barth, M. (2020). 
Park (Eds.), From “fair sex” to feminism: Sport and the COVID-19 stay-at-home order in Tyrol, Austria: Sports 
socialization of women in the industrial and post-in- and exercise behaviour in change? Public Health (185): 
dustrial eras (pp. 58-93). Cass. 218-220. 

Park, R.J. (1989). The second 100 years: Or, can physical Schultz, J. (2014). Qualifying times: Points of change in 
education become the renaissance field of the 21st U.S. women’s sports. University of Illinois Press. 
century? Quest, 41(1), 2-27. 

Schultz,J .( 2016). Kinesiology, genealogy, and an (ephem- 
Park, S., Kim, B., & Lee,J . (2020). Social distancing and eral) quantitative turn. https://temp.nassh.org/kinesi 
outdoor physical activity during the COVID-19 outbreak ology-genealogy-and-an-ephemeral-quantitative-turn/ 
in South Korea: Implications for physical distancing 

Schultz, J. (2019). Racialized osteology and athletic apti- 
strategies. Asian Pacific Journal of Public Health. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1010539520940929 tude, or “black” bones as red herrings. Journal of Sport 

History, 46(3): 325-346. 
Paxson, F.L. (1917). The rise of sport. Mississippi Valley 

Shafer, R.J. (Ed.). (1980). A guide to historical method. 
Historical Review, 4, 143-168. 

Dorsey. 
Phillips, M.G. (Ed.) (2006). Deconstructing sport history: 

Smith, J.K. (1979). Athletic training: A developing pro- 
A postmodern analysis. State University of New York 

fession [Unpublished master’s thesis]. Brigham Young 
Press. 

University. 
Pielke, R. (2020). The decline of football is real and 

Smith, R.A. (1988). Sports and freedom: The rise of big- 
its accelerating. Forbes. www.forbes.com/sites/roger- 

time college athletics. Oxford University Press. 
pielke/2020/01/28/the-decline-of-football-is-real-and- 
its-accelerating/#29b40e462f37 Staley, S.C. (1937). The history of sport: A new course 

in the professional training curriculum. Journal of 
Pieper, L.P. (2016). Sex testing: Gender policing in wom- 

Health, Physical Education and Recreation, 8, 522- 
en’s sports. University of Illinois Press. 

525, 570-572. 
Pope, S.W. (1997). Introduction: American sport his- 
tory—Toward a new paradigm. In S.W. Pope (Ed.), Stephens, T. (1987). Secular trends in adult physical 

The new American sport history: Recent approaches activity: Exercise boom or bust? Research Quarterly 
for Exercise and Sport, 58(2), 94-105. 

and perspectives (pp. 1-30). University of Illinois Press. 

Rader, B.G. (1990). American sports: From the age of Struna, N. (1977). Puritans and sport: The irretrievable 

folk games to the age of televised sports. Prentice Hall. tide of change. Journal of Sport History 4(1), 1-21. 

Ramlow, J., Kriska, A., & LaPorte, R. (1987). Physical Struna, N.L. (1996a). Historical research in physical activ- 

activity in the population: The epidemiologic spec- ity. In J.R. Thomas & J.K. Nelson (Eds.), Research meth- 

trum. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 58(2), ods in physical activity (pp. 251-275). Human Kinetics. 

111-113. Struna, N.L. (1996b). People of prowess: Sport, leisure, 

Regalado, S.O. (1992). Sport and community in Califor- and labor in early Anglo-America. University of Illi- 
nois Press. 

nia’s Japanese American “Yamato Colony,” 1930-1945. 
Journal of Sport History, 19(2), 130-143. Struna, N.L. (1997). Sport history. In J.D. Massengale & 

Rice, E.A., Hutchinson, J.L., & Lee, M. (1969). A brief R.A. Swanson (Eds.), The history of exercise and sport 

history of physical education. Ronald. science (pp. 143-179). Human Kinetics. 



References 431 

Swanson, R.A., & Spears, B. (1995). History of sport Acosta, R.V., & Carpenter, L.J. (2004). Women in inter- 
and physical education in the United States. Brown & collegiate sport: A longitudinal, national study—Twen- 
Benchmark. ty-seven year update, 1977-2004. www.acostacarpenter. 

Tison, G.H., Avram, R., & Kuhar, P. (2020), Worldwide org 
effect of COVID-19 on physical activity: A descrip- Acosta, R.V., & Carpenter, L.J. (2014). Women in inter- 
tive study. Annals of Internal Medicine. https://doi. collegiate sport: A longitudinal, national study—Thir- 
org/10.7326/M20-2665 ty-seven year update, 1977-2014. www.acostacarpenter. 

Tygiel, J. 1983). Baseball's great experiment: Jackie Rob- org 
inson and his legacy. Oxford University Press. Adams, M.L, (2019). Step-counting in the “health-society”: 

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (1961). Occupational Phenomenological reflections on walking in the era 
outlook handbook (Bulletin No. 1300). U.S. Government of the Fitbit. Social Theory & Health, 17(1), 109-124. 

Printing Office. Andrews, D. (Ed.). (1996). Deconstructing Michael 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (1982). Occupational Jordan: Reconstructing postindustrial America. Sociol- 

outlook handbook (Bulletin No. 2200). U.S. Government ogy of Sport Journal, 13(4), 315-318. 
Printing Office. Aspen Institute. (2020). Project Play: State of play 2020. 

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2020). Occupational www.aspenprojectplay.org 

outlook handbook. www.bls.gov/ooh/healthcare/phys Big Lead, The. (2016, January 5). The top 25 most influ- 
ical-therapists.htm ential people in sport business. http://thebiglead. 

US Lacrosse. (2018). US Lacross participation report. com/2016/01/05/top-25-most-influential-people-sports- 

www.uslacrosse.org/about-us-lacrosse/participa business 

tion-survey Birrell, S.. & McDonald, M.G. (2000). Reading sport, 

Vamplew, W. (2020). Twenty-four million words and still articulating power lines. In S. Birrell & M.G. McDonald 

counting: The International Journal of the History of (Eds.), Reading sport: Critical essays on power and rep- 

Sport, 1984-2020. International Journal of the History resentation (pp. 3-13). Northeastern University Press. 

of Sport, 36(17-18), 1501-1509. Brady, E., Upton, J., & Berkowitz, S. (2011, November 

Van Dalen, D.B., & Bennett, B.L. (1971). A world history 7). Salaries for college football coaches back on the 

of physical education: Cultural, philosophical, compar- rise. USA Today. www.usatoday.com/sports/college/ 

ative. Prentice Hall. football/story/2011-11-17/cover-college-football-coach 
es-salaries-rise/51242232/1 

Vertinsky, P. (1994). The eternally wounded woman: 
Women, doctors, and exercise in the late nineteenth Bureau of the Census (2012). Table 1249. Participation 

century. University of Illinois Press. in selected sport activities: 2009. Statistical Abstract 
of the United States, 2012. www.census.gov/prod/ 

Weber, E. (1970). Gymnastics and sport in fin-de-siécle 
2011pubs/12statab/arts. pdf 

France: Opium of the classes? Paper presented at the 
85th annual meeting of the American Historical Asso- Cahn, S.K. (2015). Coming on strong: Gender and Sexu- 

ciation, Boston, MA. ality in women’s sport (2nd ed.). University of Illinois 
Press. 

Whorton, J.C. (1982). Crusaders for fitness: The history of 
American health reformers. Princeton University Press. Carpenter, L.J., & Acosta, R.V. (2008). Women in intercol- 

legiate sport: A longitudinal, national study thirty-one 
Wiggins, D.K. (1980). The play of slave children in the 

year update. Brooklyn College. 
plantation communities of the old South, 1820-1860. 
Journal of Sport History, 7(2), 21-39. Carter-Francique, A., & Richardson, F. (2016). Controlling 

media, controlling access: The role of sport media on 
Wiggins, D. (2018). More than a game: A history of the black women’s sport participation. Race, Gender & 
African American experience in sport. Rowman & 

Class, 23(1-2), 7-33. 
Littlefield. 

Choi, Y. (2020a). Major League Baseball and racialized 
Wilde, A., & Seifried, C. (2018). Sport history and sport masculinities in Korean digital media. Communication 
management in the United States: Opportunities and 

and Sport, 8(2),168-187. 
challenges. Journal of Sport History, 45(1), 66-86. 

Choi, Y. (2020b). Running for Korea: Rethinking of sport 
Wilson, W. (1977). Social discontent and the growth of 

migration and in/flexible citizenship International 
wilderness sport in America: 1965-1974. Quest, 27, 54-60. Review for the Sociology of Sport, 55(3), 361-379. 

Coakley, J. (2009). Sports in society: Issues and contro- 
Chapter 5 versies (10th ed.). McGraw-Hill. 
Acosta, R.V., & Carpenter, L.J. (1994). The status of 

Cooky, C., Messner, M.A., & Musto, M. (2015). “It’s dude 
women in intercollegiate athletics. In S. Birrell & C.L. 

time!”: A quarter century of excluding women’s sports 
Cole (Eds.), Women, sport, and culture (pp. 111-118). in televised news and highlight shows. Communication 
Human Kinetics. and Sport, 3(3), 261-287. 



WH 432 References 

Copeland, K. (2021, April 1). Dawn Staley and Adia Institute for Diversity and Ethics in Sport. http:// 

Barnes make history as Black head coaches in the tidesport.org 

Final Four. Washington Post. www.washingtonpost.com Lapchick, R. (2020a). The 2020 racial and gender report 

Darnell, S.C. (2010). Sport, race, and bio-politics: Encoun- card: National Football League. The Institute for Diver- 

ters with difference in “sport for development and sity and Ethics in Sport. http://tidesport.org 

peace” internships. Journal of Sport and Social Issues, Lapchick, R. (2020b). The 2020 racaind agenlde r report 
34(4), 396-417. card: College sport. The Institute for Diversity and Ethics 

Dart, J. (2014). Sports review: A content analysis of the in Sport. http://tidesport.org 

International Review for the Sociology of Sport, Journal Lapchick, R., Davison, E., Grant, C., & Quirarte, R. (2016). 
of Sport and Social Issues, and the Sociology of Sport Gender report card: 2016 international sports report 
Journal across 25 years. International Review for the card on women in leadership roles. The Institute for 
Sociology of Sport, 49(6), 645-668. Diversity and Ethics in Sport. http://tidesport.org 

Dineen, J.K. (2014, October 16). City ends reserved soccer LaVoi, N.M., Boucher, C. & Sirek, G. (2020, August). Head 
at Mission Playground after Dropbox flap. SFGate Blog. coaches of women’s collegiate teams; A comprehensive 
www.blog.sfgate.com report on NCAA Division-I institutions, 2019-20. Min- 

Douglas, D.D., & Jamieson, K.M. (2006). A farewell to neapolis: The Tucker Center for Research on Girls & 
remember: Interrogating the Nancy Lopez farewell tour. Women in Sport. www.TuckerCenter.org 
Sociology of Sport Journal, 23(2), 117-141. Li, D.K. (2021, February 26). Sale of WNBA’s Atlanta 

Dyer, B. (2015). The controversy of sports technology: A Dream approved, ending ownership of former Senator 
systematic review. SpringerPlus, 41), 1-12. Kelly Loeffler. NBC News. www.nbcnews.com 

Economic Policy Institute. (2011). The state of working Lorber, J. (1994). Paradoxes of gender. Yale University 
America. http://stateofworkingamerica.org/inequality Press. 

Edgette, J.W. & Rupp, B.M. (2012). The last boys picked: McDonald, M.G. (1996). Michael Jordan’s family values: 
Helping boys who don’t play sports survive bullies and Marketing, meaning, and post-Reagan America. Sociol- 
boyhood. Penguin Books. ogy of Sport Journal, 13(4), 344-305. 

Eitzen, D.S. (2016). Fair and foul: Beyond the myths and McIntosh, P.C. (1963). Sport in society. Watts. 
paradoxes of sport (6th ed.). Rowman & Littlefield. McKenna, L. (2016, March 24). The madness of col- 

Fausto-Sterling, A. (2000). Sexing the body. Basic Books. lege basketball coaches’ salaries. The Atlantic. www. 

Gibbs, A. (1997, Winter). Focus groups. Social Research theatlantic.com/education/archive/2016/03/the-mad 

Update, 19. http://sru.soc.surrey.ac.uk/SRU19.html ness-of-college-basketball-coaches-salaries/475146 

Gruneau, R. (1983). Class, sports, and social development. Metheny, E. (1965). Connotations of movement in sport 

University of Massachusetts Press. and dance. Dubuque, IA: Brown. 

Guardian, The. (2014, October 8). Indian sprinter, Dutee Mills, J.P., & Denison, J. (2018). How power moves: A 

Chand, appeals against ban for failing gender test. The Foucauldian analysis of (in)effective coaching. Interna- 

Guardian. www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/08/ tional Review for the Sociology of Sport, 53(3), 296-312. 

sprinter-dutee-chand-appeals-ban-failing-gender-test Moraga, J.E. (2015). You made el team-o! The transna- 

Guttmann, A. (1978). From ritual to record: The nature tional browning of the National Basketball Association 

of modern sports. Columbia University Press. through the “Noche Latina” marketing campaigns. 
Social Inclusion, 3(3), 118-128. 

Hargreaves, J. (2001). Heroines of sport: The politics of 
difference and identity. Routledge. Moraga, J.E. (2018). On ESPN deportes: Latinos, sport 

media, and the cultural politics of visibilities. Journal of 
Jamieson, K., & Smith, M. (2016). Fundamentals of 

Sport and Social Issues, 42(6), 470-497. https://dx.doi. 
sociology of sport and physical activity. Human Kinetics. 

org/10.1177/0193723518797030 
King, C.R. (2004). This is not an Indian: Situating claims 

Nash, M. (2018). “Let’s work on your weaknesses”: Aus- 
about Indianness in sporting worlds. Journal of Sport 

tralian CrossFit coaching, masculinity and neoliberal 
G Social Issues, 28(1), 3-10. 

framings of “health” and “fitness.” Sport in Society, 
King, S. (2009). Homonormativity and the politics of race: 21(9), 1432-1453. 
Reading Sheryl Swoopes. Journal of Lesbian Studies, 

National College Athletic Association. (n.d.). NCAA 
13@), 272-290. 

research interactive database. Retrieved April 27, 2021, 
Kinkema, K.M., & Harris, J.C. (1998). MediaSport studies: from www.ncaa.org/about/resources/research 
Key research and emerging issues. In L.A. Wenner (Ed.), 

National Federation of State 
MediaSport (pp. 27-54). Routledge. High School Associations. 

(2019). 2018-19 high school athletic participation 
Lapchick, R. (2019). The 2019 racial and gender report survey. www.nfhs.org/media/1020412/2018-19_par 
card: Women’s National Basketball Association. The ticipation_survey.pdf 



References 433 

Norman, M., Esmonde, K., & Szto, C. (2019). Public sociol- Wilson, A.S. (2017). 45 Years of Title IX: The status of 
ogy of sport and digital media: A self-reflexive analysis women in intercollegiate athletics. NCAA Research 
of public engagement in the “Hockey blogosphere.” Department. www.ncaapublications.com 
Sociology of Sport Journal, 36(2), 135-143. Wilson, V., & Rodgers, W.M. III. (2016, September 20). 

Pandian, A. (2016, July 21). WNBA fines three teams Black-white wage gaps expand with rising wage 
and players for wearing Black Lives Matter T-shirts. inequality. Economic Policy Institute. www.epi.org/ 
CBS Sports. www.cbssports.com/nba/news/wnba- publication/black-white-wage-gaps-expand-with-rising- 
fines-three-teams-and-players-for-wearing-black-lives- wage-inequality 
matter-t-shirts 

Wolken, D. (2021). Naomi Osaka buys ownership stake 
Ross, H. (1996, Mar 10). Waiting for the call. Greensboro in North Carolina Courage of National Women’s Soccer 
News and Record, p. C1. League. USA Today. www.usatoday.com 

Rowe, D. (2020). Subjecting pandemic sport to a socio- Women’s Sports Foundation. (2009, March). Women’s 
logical procedure. Journal of Sociology, 56(4), 704-713. sports and fitness facts and statistics. www.womens 

Sage, G.H. (1997). Sport sociology. In J.D. Massengale sportsfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/ 

& R.A. Swanson (Eds.), History of exercise and sport wsf-facts-march-2009p.d f 

science (pp. 109-141). Human Kinetics. Zimbalist, A. (2001). Unpaid professionals: Commercial- 

Sage, G.H., Eitzen, D.S., & Beal, B. (2018). Sociology of ism and conflict in big-time college sports. Princeton 

North American sport (11th ed.). Oxford University University Press. 

Press. Zirin, D. (2013, October 16). Why they refused to play: 

Shatkin, E. (2018, October 17). The ugly, violent clearing Read the grievance letter of the Grambling State Tigers 

of Chavez Ravine before it was home to the Dodgers. football team. The Nation. www.thenation.com/article/ 

The LAist. www.laist.com why-they-refused-play-read-grievance-letter-grambling- 
state-tigers-football-team 

Siedentop, D. (1996). Valuing the physically active life: 
Contemporary and future directions. Quest, 48(3), 
206-274. Chapter 6 

Smith, M.M., & Jamieson, K.M. (2017). The way we never Abernethy, B., Baker, J., & Coté, J. (2005). Transfer of 

were: Postracial America and kinesiology. Kinesiology pattern recall skills may contribute to the development 

Review, 6(2), 167-177. of sport expertise. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 19(6), 
705-718. 

Sommeiller, E., & Price, M. (2015, January 26). The 
increasingly unequal states of America: Income inequal- Abernethy, B., & Sparrow, W.A. (1992). The rise and fall 

ity by state, 1917 to 2012. Economic Policy Institute. of dominant paradigms in motor behavior research. In 

www.epi.org/publication/income-inequality-by-state- J.J. Summers (Ed.), Approaches to the study of motor 

1917-to-2012 control and learning (pp. 3-45). Elsevier. 

Sommers, D., & Moody, J. (2019, August 6). 10 public Abernethy, B., Thomas, K.T., & Thomas, J.R. (1993). 

universities run by the highest paid presidents? US Strategies for improving understanding of motor 

News. Www.usnews.com expertise (or mistakes we have made and things we 
have learned!!). Advances in Psychology, 102, 317-350. 

Staurowsky, E.J. (1999, November). American Indian 
sport imagery and the miseducation of Americans. Adams, J.A. (1987). Historical review and appraisal of 

research on the learning, retention, and transfer of 
Quest, 51(4), 382-392. 

human motor skills. Psychological Bulletin, 101(1), 
Staurowsky, E.J. (2004). Privilege at play: On the legal 

41-74. 
and social fictions that sustain American Indian sport 
imagery. Journal of Sport & Social Issues, 28(1), 11-29. Albers, A.S., Thomas, J.R., & Thomas, K.T. (2005). Devel- 

opment of rapid aiming movements: Index of difficulty 
Staurowsky, E.J., Watanabe, N., Cooper, J., Cooky, C., 

and movement substructure. Human Movement, 6(1), 
Lough, N., Paule-Koba, A., Pharr, J., Williams, S., Cum- 5-11. 
mings, S., Issokson-Silver, K., & Snyder, M. (2020). 

Chasing equity: The triumphs, challenges, and oppor- Ashford, D., Bennett, S.J., & Davide, K. (2006). Obser- 
vational modeling effects for movement dynamics and 

tunities in sports for girls and women. Women’s Sports 

Foundation. www.womenssportsfoundation.org 
movement outcome measures across differing task 
constraints: A meta-analysis. Journal of Motor Behavior, 

Szto, C.L. (2020). Changing on the fly: Hockey through 
38(3), 185-205. 

the voices of South Asian Canadians. Rutgers Univer- 
Baker, J., & Young, B. (2014). 20 years later: Deliberate 

sity Press. 
practice and the development of expertise in sport. 

USA Today. (n.d.). NCAA salaries. USA Today. Retrieved International Review of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 
August 29, 2020, from https://sports.usatoday.com/ 7A), 135-1575 
ncaa/salaries 



mm 434 References 

Bayley, N. (1935). The development of motor abilities Gesell, A. (1928). Infancy and human growth. Macmillan. 

during the first three years. Monographs of the Society Gomez-Jordana, L.I., Stafford, J., Peper, C.L.E., & Craig, 
for Research in Child Development, 1(1), 1-26. C.M. (2018). Virtual footprints can improve walking 

Blix, M. (1892-1895). Die lange und spannung des performance in people with Parkinson’s disease. 

muskels. Skandinavische Archiv Physiologie, 3, 295- Frontiers in Neurology, 9, ar. 681. www.frontiersin.org/ 

318; 4, 399-409; 5, 150-200. article/10.3389/fneur.2018.00681 

Brady, F. (2008). The contextual interference effect and Goodway, J.D., & Robinson, L.E. (2015). Developmental 
sport skills. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 106(2), 461-472. trajectories in early sport specialization: A case for early 

sampling from a physical growth and motor develop- 
Chi, M.T.H, & Koeske, R.D. (1983). Network representa- 

ment perspective. Kinesiology Review, 43), 267-278. 
tion of a child’s dinosaur knowledge. Developmental 
Psychology, 19(1), 29-39. Haken, H., Kelso, J.A.S., & Bunz, H. (1985). A theoretical 

Christina, R.W. (2017). Motor control and learning in the model of phase transitions in human hand movements. 

North American Society for the Psychology of Sport Biological Cybernetics, 51(5), 347-350. 

and Physical Activity (NASPSPA): The first 40 years. Henry, F.M., & Rogers, D.E. (1960). Increased response 

Kinesiology Review, 6(3), 221-231. latency for complicated movements and a “memory 

Clark, J.E., & Phillips, S.J. 1991). The development of drum” theory of neuromotor reaction. Research Quar- 

intralimb coordination in the first six months of walk- terly, 313), 448-458. 

ing. In J. Fagard & P.H. Wolff (Eds.), The development Hofstein, A., & Kind, P.M. (2012). Learning in and from 

of timing control and temporal organization in coor- science laboratories. In Second International Hand- 
dinated action (pp. 245-257). Elsevier Science. book of Science Education (pp. 189-207). Springer. 

Clark, J.E., Bardid, F., Getchell, N., Robinson, L. E., Schott, Kelso, J.A.S. (1995). Dynamic patterns: The self-organi- 
N., & Whitall, J. (2019). Reflections on motor develop- zation of brain and behavior. MIT Press. 
ment research across the 20th century: Six empirical Locke, E.A., & Latham, G.P. (2016). Building a practically 
studies that changed the field. Journal of Motor Learn- useful theory of goal setting and task motivation: A 
ing and Development, 1(aop), 1-17. 35-year odyssey. In G.J. Boyle et al. (Eds.), Sage bench- 

Clark, J.E., & Phillips, S. J. (1991). The development of marks in Psychology. (pp. 1-24). Sage. 
intralimb coordination in the first six months of walk- Malina, R.M. (1984). Physical growth and maturation. In 
ing. In J. Fagard & P. H. Wolff (Eds.), The development J.R. Thomas (Ed.), Motor development during childhood 
of timing control and temporal organization in coor- and adolescence (pp. 2-26). Burgess International. 
dinated action (pp. 245-257). Elsevier Science. 

Malina, R.M., Bouchard, C., & Bar-Or, O. (2004). Growth, 
Coté, J., Lidor, R., & Hackfort, D. (2009). ISSP position maturation, and physical activity (2nd ed.). Human 
stand: To sample or to specialize? Seven postulates Kinetics. 
about youth sport activities that lead to continued par- 

McCullagh, P. (1993). Modeling: Learning, developmen- 
ticipation and elite performance. International Journal 

tal, and social psychological considerations. In R.N. 
of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 7(1), 7-17. 

Singer, M. Murphey, & L.K. Tennant (Eds.), Handbook of 
Dennis, W. (1938). Infant development under condi- research on sport psychology (pp. 106-126). Macmillan. 
tions of restricted practice and a minimum of social 

McGraw, M.B. (1935). Growth: A study of Johnny and 
stimulation: A preliminary report. Journal of Genetic 
Psychology, 53, 149-158. Jimmy. Appleton-Century-Crofts. 

McGraw, M.B. (1939). Later development of children 
Dennis, W., & Dennis, M. (1940). The effect of cradling 
practices on the age of walking in Hopi children. Jour- specially trained during infancy: Johnny and Jimmy at 

nal of Genetic Psychology, 56(1), 77-86. school age. Child Development, 10(1), 1-19. 

Espenschade, A. (1960). Motor development. In W.R. Newell, K.M. (1984). Physical constraints to develop- 
ment of motor skills. In Jerry R. Thomas (Ed.), Motor 

Johnson (Ed.), Science and medicine of exercise and 
sport (p. 330). Harper & Row. development during childhood and adolescence (pp. 

105-120). Burgess. 
Fischman, M.G. (2007). Motor learning and control foun- 
dations of kinesiology: Defining the academic core. Park, R., Seefeldt, V., Malina, R.M., & Broadhead, G.D. 

Quest, 59(1), 67-76. (1996). In Memoriam: G. Lawrance Rarick. Journal of 
Physical Education, Recreation &Dance, 67(6), 16. 

Fitts, P.M., & Posner, M.I. (1967). Human performance. 
P

Brooks/Cole. ayne, V.G., & Isaacs, L.D. (2017). Human motor devel- 
opment: A lifespan approach. Routledge. 

Galton, F. (1876). The history of twins as a criterion of 
Perreault

the relative power of nature. Anthropological Institute , M.E., & French, K.E. (2015). External-focus 

Journal, 5, 391-406. feedback benefits free-throw learning in children. 
Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 86(4), 

Gentile, A.M. (1972). A working model of skill acquisition 
422-427. 

with application to teaching. Quest, 17(1), 2-23. 



References 435 

Rikli, R. (2005). Movement and mobility influence on Thomas, J.R., & Thomas, K.T. (2008). Principles of motor 
successful aging: Addressing the issue of low physical development for elementary school physical education. 
activity. Quest, 57(1), 46-66. Elementary School Journal, 108(3), 181-195. 

Rikli, R.E., & Jones, C.J. (2013). Development and vali- Thomas, K.T., Gallagher, J.D., & Thomas, J.R. (2001). 
dation of criterion-referenced clinically relevant fitness Motor development and skill acquisition during child- 
standards for maintaining physical independence in hood and adolescence. In R.N. Singer, H.A. Hausenblas, 
later years. The Gerontologist, 53(2), 255-267. & C.M. Janelle (Eds.), Handbook of sport psychology 

Roberton, M.A. (1984). Changing motor patterns during (2nd ed., pp. 20-52). Wiley. 
childhood. In Jerry R. Thomas (Ed.), Motor develop- Thomas, K.T., & Thomas, J.R. (1994). Developing exper- 
ment during childhood and adolescence. (pp. 48-90). tise in sport: The relation of knowledge to performance. 
Burgess. International Journal of Sport Psychology, 25, 295-312. 

Rosenbaum, D.A. (2010). Human motor control 2nd Ulrich, B. (2007). Motor development: Core curricular 
ed. Elsevier. concepts. Quest, 5911), 77-91. 

Rymal, A.M. (2018). Let’s make it real: A commentary on Ulrich, B., & Reeve, T.G. (2005). Studies in motor behav- 
observation research. Journal of Motor Learning and ior: 75 years of research in motor development, learn- 
Development, 6(1), 73-80. ing, and control. Research Quarterly for Exercise and 

Salmoni, A.W., Schmidt, R.A., & Walter, C.B. (1984). Knowl- Sport, 75(sup 2), S62-S70. 

edge of results and motor learning: A review and critical Whitall,J .,S chott, N., Robinson, L.E., Bardid, F., & Clark, 
reappraisal. Psychological Bulletin, 95(3), 355-386. J.E. (2020). Motor development research: I. The lessons 

Schmidt, R.A. (1975). A schema theory of discrete motor of history revisited (the 18th to the 20th century). 

skill learning. Psychological Review, 82(4), 225-260. Journal of Motor Learning and Development, 1, 1-18. 

Schmidt, R.A., & Lee, T.D. (2020). Motor learning and Wyble, B.P., & Rosenbaum, D.A. (2016). Are motor 

performance: From principles to application (6th ed.). adjustments quick because they don’t require detection 

Human Kinetics. or because they escape competition? Motor Control, 
20(2), 182-186. 

Schmidt, R.A., Lee, T.D., Winstein, C., Wulf, G., & Zelaznik, 
H.N. (2019). Motor control and learning: A behavioral 
emphasis (6th ed.). Human Kinetics. Chapter 7 

Seefeldt, V., & Haubenstricker,J .( 1982). Patterns, phases, Baltzell, A.L. (Ed.). (2016). Mindfulness and performance. 

or stages: An analytical model for the study of develop- Cambridge University Press. 

mental movement. In J.A.S. Kelso & J.E. Clark (Eds.), The Balyi, I., Way, R., & Higgs, C. (2013). Long-term athlete 
development of movement control and co-ordination development. Human Kinetics. 
(pp. 309-318). Wiley. Beilock, S. (2010). Choke. Free Press. 

Sherrington, C.S. (1906). The integrative action of the Bell, J.J., & Hardy, J. (2009). Effects of attentional focus 
nervous system. Yale University Press. on skilled performance in golf. Journal of Applied Sport 

Slone, M.R. (1984). Ruth B. Glassow: The cutting edge. Psychology, 21, 163-177. 
The Academy Papers. www.nationalacademyofkinesi Castaneda, B., & Gray, R. (2007). Effects of focus of 
ology.org/.../TAP_20_CuttingEdgeinPEandExerciseSci attention on baseball batting performance in players 

Spirduso, W.W., & MacRae, P.G. (1990). Motor perfor- of differing skill levels. Journal of Sport and Exercise 
mance and aging. In J.E. Birren & K.W. Schaie (Eds.), Psychology, 29, 60-77. 
The handbook of psychology of aging (3rd ed., pp. 184- Ciccolo, J.T., Witworth, J.S., & Nosrat, S. (2019). Psycho- 
197). Academic Press. logical benefits of exercise. In M.H. Anshel, S.J. Petru- 

Stelmach, G.E., & Nahom, A. (1992). Cognitive-motor abil- zzello, & E.E. Labbe (Eds), APA handbook of sport and 
ities of the elderly driver. Human Factors, 34), 53-65. exercise psychology, Vol. 2. Exercise psychology (pp. 

Thomas, J.R. (1997). History of motor behavior. In J.D. 93-108). American Psychological Association. 

Massengale & R.A. Swanson (Eds.), History of exercise Clarey, C. (2014, February 23). Olympians use imagery 
and sport sciences (pp. 203-292). Human Kinetics. as mental training. The New York Times. www.nytimes. 

Thomas, J.R. (2006). Motor behavior: From telegraph com/2014/02/23/sports/olympics/olympians-use-imag 

keys and twins to linear slides and stepping. Quest, ery-as-mental-training.html 

581), 112-127. Dweck, C.S. (2006). Mindset: The new psychology of 

Thomas, J.R., & French, K.E. (1985). Gender differences success. Ballantine. 

across age in motor performance: A meta-analysis. Easterbrook, J.A. (1959). The effect of emotion on cue 

Psychological Bulletin, 98(2), 260-282. utilization and the organization of behavior. Psycholog- 
ical Review, 66, 183-201. 

Thomas, J.R., & Thomas, K.T. (1989). What is motor devel- 
opment: Where does it belong? Quest, 41 (3), 203-212. 



mH 436 References 

Eys, M., Burke, S.M., & Evans, B. (2021). The sport team Morrice, P. (2019, August). Tiger at large. Golf Digest, 

as an effective group. In J. M. Williams & V. Krane DiyeaD- 
(Eds.), Applied sport psychology: Personal growth to Mullen, R., & Hardy, L. (2010). Conscious processing and 
peakp erformance (8th ed., pp. 122-138). McGraw-Hill. the process goal paradox. Journal of Sport and Exercise 

Franz, S.I., & Hamilton, G.V. (1905). The effects of exer- Psychology, 32, 275-297. 

cise upon the retardation in conditions of depression. Neil, R., Hanton, S., & Mellalieu, S.D. (2013). Seeing 
American Journal of Insanity, 62, 239-250. things in a different light: Assessing the effects of a 

Ginsburg, R.D., Smith, S.R., Danforth, N., Ceranoglu, cognitive-behavioral intervention upon the further 
T.A., Durant, $.A., Kamin, H., Babcock, R., Robin, L., appraisals and performance of golfers. Journal of 

& Masek, B. (2014). Patterns of specialization in pro- Applied Sport Psychology, 25, 106-130. 
fessional baseball players. Journal of Clinical Sport Perry, I.S., Chow, G.M., Tenenbaum, G., & Katz, YJ. 
Psychology, 8, 201-275. (2018). The effect of motor-mental preperformance 

Goffi, C. (1984). Tournament tough. Ebury Press. routines on motor performance in novice learners. 

Griffith, C.R. (1926). Psychology of coaching. Scribner’s. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 304), 1-19. https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/10413200.2017.1411404 

Griffith, C.R. (1928). Psychology and athletics. Scribner’s. 
Rhodes, R.E., & Pfaelli, L.A. (2012). Personality and 

Hanton, S., Wadey, R., & Mellalieu, S.D. (2008). Advanced physical activity. In E.O. Acevedo (Ed.), The Oxford 
psychological strategies and anxiety responses in handbook of exercise psychology (pp. 195-223). Oxford 
sport. The Sport Psychologist, 22, 472-490. https://doi. 

University Press. 
org/10.1123/tsp.22.4.472 

Smith, R.E., & Christensen, D.S. (1995). Psychological 
Hellison, D. (2010). Teaching personal and social respon- 

skills as predictors of performance and survival in 
sibility through physical activity (3rd ed.). Human 

professional baseball. Journal of Sport and Exercise 
Kinetics. 

Psychology, 17, 399-415. 
Heuze, J.P., & Brunel, P. (2003). Social loafing in a com- 

Smith, R.E., Schutz, R.W., Smoll, E.L., & Ptacek, J.T. (1995). 
petitive context. International Journal of Sport and 

Development and validation of a multidimensional 
Exercise Psychology, 1, 246-263. 

measure of sport-specific psychological skills: The 
Holt, N.L. (Ed.) (2016). Positive youth development Athletic Coping Skills Inventory-28. Journal of Sport 
through sport. Routledge. and Exercise Psychology, 17, 379-398. 

Jones, G., Hanton, S., & Connaughton, D. (2007). A Vallerand, R.J., Blanchard, C., Mageau, G.A., Koestner, 
framework of mental toughness in the world’s best R., Ratelle, C., Leonard, M., Gagné, M., & Marsolais, J. 
performers. The Sport Psychologist, 21, 243-264. (2003). Les passions de l’ame: On obsessive and har- 

Krane, V., Williams, J.M., & Graupensperger, S.A. (2021). monious passion. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychological characteristics of peak performance. In Psychology, 85, 756-767. 
J.M. Williams & V. Krane (Eds.), Applied sport psychol- Vallerand, R.J., Salvy, S.J., Mageau, G.A., Elliot, A.J., Denis, 
ogy: Personal growth to peak performance (8th ed., pp. P.L., Grouzet, F.M., & Blanchard, C. (2007). On the role 
159-175). McGraw-Hill. of passion in performance. Journal of Personality, 

Lebeau, J., Liu, $., Saenz-Moncaleano, C., Sanduve- 75(3), 505-534. 
te-Chaves, S., Chacon-Moscoso, S., Becker, B.J., & Tenen- Vealey, R.S., & Chase, M.A. (2016). Best practfoir cyoeut h 
baum, G. (2016). Quiet eye and performance in sport: A Sport. Human Kinetics. 
meta-analysis. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 

Vealey, R.S., & Forlenza, S.T. (2021). Using imagery as a 
38(5), 441-457. https://doi.org/10.1123/jsep.2015-0123 

mental training tool in sport. In J.M. Williams & V. Krane 
Lox, C.L, Ginis, K.A.M., Gainforth, H.L., & Petruzello, S.J. (Eds.), Applied sport psychology: Personal growth to 
(2019). The psychology of exercise: Integrating theory peak performance (8th ed., pp. 244-277). McGraw-Hill. 
and practice 5" ed. Routledge. 

Vickers, J.N. (2016). Origins and current issues in Quiet 
Maese, R. (2016, July 28). For Olympians, seeing (in their Eye research. Current Issues in Sport Science 1. www. 
minds) is believing (it can happen). The Washington momentum-quarterly.org/ojs2/index.php/ciss/article/ 
Post. www.washingtonpost.com/sports/olympics/ view/36 
for-olympians-seeing-in-their-minds-is-believing-it- 

Weiss, M.R., Bolter, N.D., & Kipp, L.E. (2016). Evaluation 
can-happen/2016/07/28/6966709c-532e-11e6-bbf5- 

of The First Tee in promoting positive youth develop- 
957ad17b4385_story.html 

ment: Group comparisons and longitudinal trends. 
Mandolesi, L., Polverino, A., Montuori, S., Foti, F., Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 87, 271-283. 
Ferraioli, G., Sorrentino, P., & Sorrentino, G. (2018). 

Yao, Q., Xu, F,, & Lin, J. (2020). A qualit
Effects of physical exercise on cognitive functioning ative study on 

pre-performance routines of diving: Evidence from elite 
and wellbeing: Biological and psychological benefits. 

Chinese diving athletes. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 
Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 509. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 

193. www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/ar
fpsyg.2018.00509 ticles/PMC7033503/ 



References 

Chapter 8 logic comparison of anterior cruciate ligament injuries 

Abraham, L., Bird, M., Johnson, J., Knudson, D., Rus- in high school athletics. Journal of Athletic Training, 

sell, P., Smith, D., & Strohmeyer, S. (2018). Guidelines 48(6), 810-817. 

for undergraduate biomechanics (4th ed.). |Guid- Junior, R.M., Berton, R., de Souza, T.M.F., Chacon-Mikahil, 
ance Document] SHAPE America. https://www.sha- M.P.T., & Cavaglieri, C.R. (2017). Effect of the flexibil- 
peamerica.org/uploads/pdfs/2018/guidelines/Guide ity training performed immediately before resistance 
lines-for-UG-Biomechanicsp.d f training On muscle hypertrophy, maximum strength 

Atwater, A.E. (1980). Kinesiology/biomechanics: Perspec- and flexibility. European Journal of Applied Physiology, 

tives and trends. Research Quarterlfyo r Exercise and 117(4), 767-774. 

Sport, 51, 193-218. Karlsson, M.K., & Rosengren, B.E. (2020). Exercise and 

Behm, D.G., Blazevich, A.J., Kay, A.D., & McHugh, M. peak bone mass. Current Osteoporosis Reports, 18Q), 

(2016). Acute effects of muscle stretching on physical 285-290. 

performance, range of motion, and injury incidence in Knudson, D. (2013). Qualitative diagnosis of human 
healthy, active individuals: A systematic review. Applied movement: Improving performance in sport and exer- 
Physiology, Nutrition, and Metabolism, 41, 1-11. cise (3rd ed.). Human Kinetics. 

Bressler, B., & Frankel, J. P. (1950). The forces and Knudson, D., & Noffal, G. (2005). Time course of 
moments in the leg during level walking. Transactions stretch-induced isometric strength deficits. European 
of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 72, Journal of Applied Physiology, 94, 348-351. 
27-36. Magnusson, P., & Renstrom, P. (2006). The European 

Bus, S.A., van Deursen, R.W., Armstrong, D.G., Lewis, College of Sports Sciences position statement: The role 
J.E.A., Caravaggi, C.F., & Cavanagh, P.R. (2016). Foot- of stretching exercises in sports. European Journal of 

wear and offloading interventions to prevent and heal Sport Science, 6, 87-91. 
foot ulcers and reduce plantar pressure in patients with Meister, D. (1999). The history of human factors and 
diabetes: A systematic review. Diabetes/Metabolism ergonomics. Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Research and Reviews, 32(S1), 99-118. 

National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and 
Cash, J. (2015, July 1). Meyerhold’s biomechanics for Skin Diseases (NIAMS). (2019). Handout on health: 
theatre. www.thedramateacher.com/meyerholds-bio- Osteoarthritis. NIH Publication No. 15-4617. www. 
mechanics-for-theatre/ niams.nih.gov/health_info/osteoarthritis/ 

Castrogiovanni, P., Di Rosa, M., Ravalli, S., Castorina, Nessler, T., Denney, L., & Sampley, J. (2017). ACL injury 
A. Gulielmino, C. .. . Musumeci, G. (2019). Moderate prevention: What does research tell us? Current Reviews 
physical activity as a prevention method for knee osteo- in Musculoskeletal Medicine, 10(3), 281-288. 
arthritis and the role of synoviocytes as biological key. 

Padua, D.A., DiStefano, L.J., Hewett, T.E., et al. (2018). 
International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 20(3), 511. 

National Athletic Trainers’ Association position state- 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20030511 

ment: Prevention of anterior cruciate ligament injury. 
Elftman, H. (1939). Forces and energy changes in the leg Journal of Athletic Training, 53(), 5-19. 
during walking. American Journal of Physiology, 125, 

Pitches, J. (2004). Vsevolod Meyerhold (2nd ed.). Rout- 
339-3506.Hatze, H. (1974). The meaning of the term ledge. 
“biomechanics.” Journal of Biomechanics, 7, 189-190. 

Pope, M.H. (2005). Giovanni Alfonso Borelli—the father 
Huang, Y.-L., Jung, J.,M ulligan, C.M.S., Oh,J ., & Norcross, 

of biomechanics. Spine, 15(30), 2350-2355. 
M.F. (2020). A majority of anterior cruciate ligament 
injuries can be prevented by injury prevention pro- Pope, R.P., Herbert, R.D., Kirwan, J.D., & Graham, B,J. 

grams: A systematic review of randomized controlled (2000). A randomized trial of preexercise stretching for 

trials and cluster-randomized controlled trials with prevention of lower-limb injury. Medicine & Science in 

meta-analysis. American Journal of Sports Medicine, Sports & Exercise, 32(2), 271-277. 

48(6), 1505-1515. Posse, N. (1890). The special kinesiology of educational 

gymnastics. Lothrop, Lee and Shepard. 
Hughes, G. (2014). A review of recent perspectives on 
biomechanical risk factors associated with anterior Rooney, B.D., & Derrick, T.R. (2013). Joint contact loading 

cruciate ligament injury. Research in Sports Medicine, in forefoot and rearfoot strike patterns during running. 

ZANDS-212: Journal of Biomechanics, 46, 2201-2206. 

Humphrey, J.D. (2003). Review paper: Continuum bio- Schneck, D.J. (2005). Forensic biomechanics. American 

mechanics of soft biological tissues. Proceedings of the Laboratory, 37(8), Editor’s Page. www.castonline.ilstu. 

Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and edu/mccaw/Forensic%20Biomechanics.pdf 

Engineering Sciences, 4592029), 3-46. Seth, A., Hicks, J.L., Uchida, T.K., Habib, A., Dembia, 

Joseph, A.M., Collins, C.L., Henke, N.M., Yard, E.E., Fields, C.L., Dunne, J.J., Ong, C.F, DeMers, M.S., Rajagopal, 

S.K., & Comstock, R.D. (2013). A multisport epidemio- A., Millard, M., Hamner, S.R., Arnold, E.M., Yong, J.R., 



me 438 References 

Lakshmikanth, S.K., Sherman, M.A., Ku, J.P., & Delp, Berryman, J.W. (1995). Out of many, one: A history of the 

S.L. (2018). OpenSim: Simulating musculoskeletal American College of Sports Medicine. Human Kinetics. 

dynamics and neuromuscular control to study human Blair, S.N., Kohl, H.W., Paffenbarger, R.S., Clark, D.G., 
and animal movement. PLoS Computational Biology, Cooper, K.H., & Gibbons, L.W. (1989). Physical fitness 
14(7), €1006223. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. and all-cause mortality: A prospective study of healthy 
pcbi.1006223 men and women. Journal of the American Medical 

Silverwood, V., Blagojevic-Bucknall, M., Jinks, C., Jordan, Association, 262(17), 2395-2401. 

J.L., Protheroe, J., & Jordan, K.P. (2015). Review: Cur- Booth, E.W. (1989). Application of molecular biology in 
rent evidence on risk factors for knee osteoarthritis in exercise physiology. In K.B. Pandolf (Ed.), Exercise 
older adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis. and sport sciences reviews (Vol. 17, pp. 1-27). Williams 
Osteoarthritis and Cartilage, 23(4), 507-515. & Wilkins. 

Simic, L., Sarabon, N., & Markovic, G. (2013). Does Bouchard, C., Lesage, R., Lortie, G., Simoneau, J.A., 
pre-exercise static stretching inhibit maximal muscular Hamel, P., Boulay, M.R., Pérusse, L., Thériault, G., & 
performance? A meta-analytic review. Scandinavian Leblanc, C. (1986). Aerobic performance in brothers, 
Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports, 23, 131-148. dizygotic and monozygotic twins. Medicine and Science 

Skarstrom, W. (1909). Gymnastic kinesiology. Bassette. in Sports and Exercise, 18(6), 639-640. 

Sloan, M.R. (1987). Ruth B. Glassow: The cutting edge. Bray, M.S., Hagberg, J.M., Pérusse, L., Rankinen, T., Roth, 

Academy Papers No. 20, National Academy of Kinesi- S.M., Wolfarth, B., & Bouchard, C. (2009). The human 
ology, 120-128. www.nationalacademyofkinesiology. gene map for performance and health-related fitness 
org/1980-1989/1980-1989/academy-papers-no-20-1987. phenotypes: The 2006-2007 update. Medicine and 

Snoeker, B.A.M., Turkiewicz, A., Magnusson, K., Frobell, Science in Sports and Exercise, 41(1), 35-73. 

R., Yu, D.H., Peat, G., & Englund, M. (2020). Risk of knee Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2011). 
osteoarthritis after different types of knee injuries in Nonfatal traumatic brain injuries related to sports and 
young adults: A population-based cohort study. British recreation activities among persons aged <19 years— 
Journal of Sports Medicine, 54(12), 725-730. United States, 2001-2009. Morbidity and Mortality 

Taylor, FW. (1911). The principles of scientific manage- Weekly Report, 60(39), 1337-1342. Retrieved from www. 

ment. Harper & Brothers. cde.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6039a1.htm 

Vannini, F., Spalding, T., Andriolo, L., Berruto, M., Denti, Chau, J.Y., van der Ploeg, H.P., Merom, D., Chey, T., 

M., Espregueira-Mendes, J., Menetrey, J., Peretti, G., & Bauman, A.E. (2012). Cross-sectional associations 

Seil, R., & Filardo, G. (2016). Sport and early osteoar- between occupational and leisure-time sitting, physi- 

thritis: The role of sport in aetiology, progression and cal activity and obesity in working adults. Preventive 

treatment of knee osteoarthritis. Knee Surgery, Sports Medicine, 543-4), 195-200. 

Traumatology, Arthroscopy, 24(6), 1786-1796. Clarkson, P.M., & Haymes, E.M. (1995). Exercise and 

Vina, E.R., & Kwoh, C.K. (2018). Epidemiology of mineral status of athletes: Calcium, magnesium, phos- 

osteoarthritis: Literature update. Current Opinions in phorus, and iron. Medicine and Science in Sports and 

Rheumatology, 30(2), 160-167. Exercise, 27(6), 831-843. 

Winter, D.A. (1985). Biomechanics and motor control of Clayton, D.J., Evans, G.H., & James, L.J. (2014). Effect 

human gait. University of Waterloo Press. of drink carbohydrate content on post-exercise gastric 
emptying, rehydration and the calculation of net fluid 
balance. International Journal of Sport Nutrition and 

Chapter 9 
Exercise Metabolism, 241), 79-89. 

American College of Sports Medicine. (2004). Nutrition 
Coggan, A., & Coyle, E. (1991). Carbohydrate ingestion 

and athletic performance. Medicine and Science in 
during prolonged exercise: Effects on metabolism and 

Sports and Exercise, 41(3), 709-731. 
performance. In J.O. Holloszy (Ed.), Exercise and sport 

American College of Sports Medicine. (2018). ACSM’s sciences reviews (Vol. 19, pp. 1-40). Williams & Wilkins. 
guidelines for exercise testing and prescription. Lip- 

Conners, R.T., Morgan, D.W., Fuller, D.K., & Caputo, 
pincott Williams & Wilkins. 

J.L. (2014). Underwater treadmill training, glycemic 
Armstrong, L.E., Costill, D.L., & Fink, W.J. (1985). Influ- control, and health-related fitness in adults with type 
ence of diuretic-induced dehydration on competitive 2 diabetes. International Journal of Aquatic Research 
running performance. Medicine and Science in Sports and Rehabilitation, 8(4), 382-396. 
and Exercise, 17(4), 456-461. 

Di Pietro, L., Dziura, J., & Blair, S.N. (2004). Estimated 
Astrand, P.-O. (1991). Influence of Scandinavian scien- change in physical activity level (PAL) and prediction 

tists in exercise physiology. Scandinavian Journal of of 5-year weight change in men: The Aerobics Center 
Medicine and Science in Sports, 1(1), 3-9. Longitudinal Study. International Journal of Obesity 

Bar-Or, O. (1983). Pediatric sports medicine for the prac- and Related Metabolic Disorders, 28(12), 1541-1547. 
titioner. Springer-Verlag. 



References 439 i 

Dill, D.B. (1967). The Harvard Fatigue Laboratory: Kenney, W.L., Wilmore, J.H., & Costill, D.L. (2020). Phys- 
Its development, contributions, and demise. In C.B. iology of sport and exercise (7th ed.). Champaign, IL: 
Chapman (Ed.), Physiology of muscular exercise (pp. Human Kinetics. 
161-170). American Heart Association. 

Kilpatrick, M., Jung, M., & Little, J. (2014). High-inten- 
Dill, D.B., Talbott, J.H., & Edwards, H.T. (1930). Studies in sity interval training: A review of physiological and 
muscular activity. VI. Responses of several individuals psychological responses. ACSM’s Health and Fitness 
to a fixed task. Journal of Physiology, 69(3), 267-305. Journal, 18(5), 11-16. 

Donnelly, J.E., Blair, S.N., Jakicic, J.M., Manore, M.M., Kroll, W.P. (1982). Graduate study and research in phys- 
Rankin, J.W., & Smith, B.K. (2009). American College ical education. Human Kinetics. 
of Sports Medicine position stand. Appropriate physi- 

Lawler, P.R., Filion, K.B., & Eisenberg, M.J. (2011). Effi- 
cal activity intervention strategies for weight loss and 

cacy of exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation post-myo- 
prevention of weight regain for adults. Medicine and cardial infarction: A systematic review and meta-anal- 
Science in Sports and Exercise, 41(2), 459-471. 

ysis of randomized controlled trials. American Heart 
Fagard, D. (2001). Exercise characteristics and the blood Journal, 162(4), 571-584. 
pressure response to dynamic physical training. Medi- 

Lee, I., Shiroma, E.J., Kamada, M., Bassett, D.R., Mat- 
cine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 33(6 Suppl.), 

thews, C.E., & Buring, J.E. (2019). Association of step 
$484-S492. 

volume and intensity with all-cause mortality in older 
Gollnick, P.D., Timson, B.F., Moore, R.L., & Riedy, M. women. JAMA Internal Medicine, 179(8), 1105-1112. 
(1981). Muscular enlargement and number of fibers in Lowder, T., Padgett, D., & Woods, J. (2005). Moderate 
skeletal muscles of rats. Journal of Applied Physiology, exercise protects mice from death due to influenza. 
50(5), 936-943. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, 19, 377-380. 

Gonyea, W.J. (1980). Role of exercise in inducing Margaria, R., Edwards, H.T., & Dill, D.B. (1933). The pos- 
increases in skeletal muscle fiber number. Journal of sible mechanisms of contracting and paying the oxygen 
Applied Physiology, 48(3), 421-426. debt and the role of lactic acid in muscular contraction. 

Hagberg, J.M. (1987). Effect of training on the decline American Journal of Physiology, 106(3), 689-715. 
of VO,max with aging. Federation Proceedings, 406(5), Martin, S.A., Pence, B.D., & Woods, J.A. (2009). Exercise 
1830-1833. and respiratory tract viral infections. Exercise and Sport 

Hales, C.M., Carroll; M.D., Fryar, C.D., & Ogden, CL. Sciences Reviews, 37(4), 157-164. 
(2017). Prevalence of obesity among adults and youth: Moore ws. Cpe Lee mim Welderpassm Ens @ampbellas bie 
United States, 2015-2016. NCHS data brief, no 288. Sampson, J.N., Kitahara, C.M., Keadle, S.K., Arem, H., 
National Center for Health Statistics. www.cdc.gov/ de Gonzalez, A.B., Hartge, P., Adami, H-O, Blair, C.K., 
nchs/data/databriefs/db288p.df  Borch, K.B., Boyd, E., Check, D.P., Fournier, A., Freed- 

eee, (CaM, Cavsqoll INLD), ayers (CID ee Olexelerey, (Call man, N.D., Gunter, M., Johannson, M., Khaw, K-T., Linet, 

(2020). Prevalence of obesity and severe obesity among M.S., Orsini, N., Park, Y., Riboli, E.,... Patel, A.V. (2016). 
adults: United States, 2017-2018. NCHS Data Brief, no Association of leisure-time physical activity with risk 
360. National Center for Health Statistics. www.cdc. of 26 types of cancer in 1.44 million adults. Journal 
gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db360-hp.d f of the American Medical Association, 176(6), 816-825. 

Hamilton, M.T., Healy, G.N., Dunstan, D.W., Zderic, Morris, J.N., Heady, J.A., Raffle, PA.B., Roberts, C.G., & 
T.W., & Owen, N. (2008). Too little exercise and too Parks, J.W. (1953). Coronary heart disease and physical 
much sitting: Inactivity physiology and the need for activity of work. Lancet, 2(5111), 1111-1120. 

new recommendations on sedentary behavior. Current Morrissey, M.C., Harman, E.A., & Johnson, MJ. (1995). 
Cardiovascular Risk Reports, 2(4), 292-298. Resistance training modes: Specificity and effectiveness. 

Haymes, E.M., & Wells, C.L. (1986). Environment and Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 27(5), 

human performance. Human Kinetics. 648-660. 

Hill, A.V., & Lupton, H. (1923). Muscular exercise, lactic Moshfegh, A., Goldman, J., & Cleveland, L. (2005). 

acid, and the supply and utilization of oxygen. Q/M, What we eat in America, NHANES 2001-2002. Usual 

os-16(62), 135-171. nutrient intake from foods as compared to dietary 
reference intakes. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agri- 

Hultman, E. (1967). Physiological role of muscle glycogen 
cultural Research Service. www.ars.usda.gov/ARSUser 

in man, with special reference to exercise. Circulation 
Files/80400530/pdf/0102/usualintaketables2001-02.pdf 

Research, 21(Suppl. 1), 99-114. 
NIH Consensus Development Panel on Physical Activity 

Ivy, J.L., Katz, A.L., & Cutler, C.L. (1989). Muscle glycogen 
and Cardiovascular Health. (1996). Physical activity and 

resynthesis after exercise: Effect of time on carbohy- 
cardiovascular health. Journal of the American Medical 

drate ingestion. Journal of Applied Physiology, 64(A), 
Association, 276(3), 241-246. 

1480-1485. 



References 

Paffenbarger, R.S. (1994). 40 years of progress: Physical Timson, B.F., Bowlin, B.K., Dudenhoeffer, G.A., & 

activity, health and fitness. In 40th anniversary lectures George, J.B. (1985). Fiber number, area, and compo- 

(pp. 93-109). American College of Sports Medicine. sition of mouse soleus muscle following enlargement. 
Journal of Applied Physiology, 58(2), 619-624. 

Pasricha, S-R., Low, M., Thompson, J., Farrell, A., & 
De-Regil, L-M. (2014). Iron supplementation benefits U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (1996). 

physical performance in women of reproductive age: Physical activity and health: A report of the surgeon 

A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of general. U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser- 

Nutrition, 144(6), 900-914. vices, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and 

Pate, R.R., Pratt, M., Blair, S.N., Haskell, W.L., Macera, 
Health Promotion. https://health.gov/sites/default/ 

C.A., Bouchard, C., Buchner, D., Ettinger, W., Heath, 
files/2019-09/paguidep.d f 

G.W., King, A.C., Kriska, A., Leon, A.S., Marcus, B.H., 

Morris,J. ,Paffenbarger R.S. Jr, Patrick, K., Pollock, M.L., U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2018). 
Rippe, J.M., Sallis, J., & Wilmore, J.H. (1995). Physical Physical activity guidelines for Americans (2nd ed.). 

activity and public health: A recommendation from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 
Centers for Disease Control and the American College U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers 
of Sports Medicine. Journal of the American Medical for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center 
Association, 273(5), 402-407. for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 

Rall, J.A. (2017). Nobel Laureate A.V. Hill and the refugee & Division of Nutrition, Physical Activity and Obesity. 
scholars, 1933-1945. Advances in Physiology Education, (2015). Data, trends, and maps. www.cdc.gov/necd 
41(2), 248-259. php/DNPAO/index.html 

Rodriguez, N.R., DiMarco, N.M., Langley, S., American Vuori, I.M. (2001). Dose-response of physical activity 
Dietetic Association, Dietitians of Canada, & American and low back pain, osteoarthritis, and osteoporosis. 
College of Sports Medicine: Nutrition and Athletic Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 33(6 
Performance (2009). Position of the American Dietetic Suppl.), $551-S586. 
Association, Dietitians of Canada, and the American Willett, W.C., Manson, J.E., Stampler, M.J., Colditz, G.A., 
College of Sports Medicine: Nutrition and athletic Rosner, B., Speizer, FE., & Hennekena, C.H. (1995). 
performance. Journal of the American Dietetic Associ- Weight, weight change, and coronary disease in women. 
ation, 1093), 509-527. Journal of the American Medical Association, 273(6), 

Rowland, T.W. (1989). Oxygen uptake and endurance 461-465. 
fitness in children: A developmental perspective. Pedi- Winder, W.W., & Thomson, D.M. (2007). Cellular energy 
atric Exercise Science, 1(4), 313-328. sensing and signaling by AMP-activated protein 

Saltin, B. (1973). Metabolic fundamentals in exercise. kinase. Cellular Biochemistry and Biophysics, 47, 332- 
Medicine and Science in Sports, 5(3), 137-146. 347. 

Sinha, R., Fisch, G., Teague, B., Tamborlane, W.V., Banyas, Woods, J.A., Keylock, K.T., Lowder, T. . . . McAuley, E. 
B., Allen, K., Savoye, M., Rieger, V., Taksali, S., Barbetta, (2009). Cardiovascular exercise training extends influ- 
G., Sherwin, R.S., & Caprio, S. (2002). Prevalence of enza vaccine seroprotection in sedentary older adults: 
impaired glucose tolerance among children and ado- The Immune Function Intervention Trial. Journal of the 
lescents with marked obesity. New England Journal of American Geriatrics Society, 57, 2183-2191. 
Medicine, 340(11), 802-810. Zwiren, L.D. (1989). Anaerobic and aerobic capacities of 

Strong, W.B., Malina, R.M., Blimkie, C.J.R., Daniels, S.R., children. Pediatric Exercise Science, 1(1), 31-44. 
Dishman, R.K., Gutin, B., Hergenroeder, A.C., Must, 
A., Nixon, P.A., Pivarnik, J.M., Rowland, T., Trost, S., & Chapter 10 
Trudeau, F. (2005). Evidence-based physical activity for 

Abbasi, K. (2019). First do no harm: The impossible 
school-age youth. Journal of Pediatrics, 146(6), 732-737. 

oath. British Medical Journal, 366, 14734. https://doi. 
Teramoto, M., & Bungum, T.J. (2010). Mortality and lon- org/101136/bmj/i4734 
gevity of elite athletes. Journal of Science and Medicine 
in Sport, 13(4), 410-410. American Kinesiology Association. (2003). Recommended 

core areas for coursework in an undergraduate kine- 
Thompson, P.D., Buchner, D., Pina, I.L., Balady, G_J., 

siology curriculum. www.americankinesiology.org/ 
Williams, M.A., Marcus, B.H., Berra, K.,... Wenger, 

white-papers/white-papers/re-examining-the-under 
N.K. (2003). Exercise and physical activity in the pre- 

graduate-core-in-kinesiology-in-a-time-of-change 
vention and treatment of atherosclerotic cardiovascular 
disease. Arteriosclerosis, thrombosis, and vascular Blackshear, T.B., Barton, A.T., & Mosley, J. (2019). Eval- 

biology, 23(8), 42-49. uation of student fitness levels in exercise science and 
physical education teacher education programs. Quest, 

Thompson, W.R. (2019). Worldwide survey of fitness 71(1), 21-41. 
trends for 2020. ACSM’s Health & Fitness Journal, 
23(6), 10-18. 



References 441 

Brusseau, T.A. (2018). The benefits and challenges of Nunome, H., Doyo, W., Sakurai, S., Ikegmai, Y., & Kyo- 
kinesiology as a pre-allied health degree. Kinesiology nosuke, Y. (2002). A kinematic study of the upper-limb 
Review, 7(4), 300-304. motion of wheelchair basketball shooting in tetraplegic 

Cardinal, B. J. (2001). Role modeling attitudes and phys- adults. Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Devel- 
ical activity and fitness promoting behaviors of HPERD opment, 39, 03-71. 
professionals and preprofessionals. Research Quarterly Professional Standards Councils. (n.d.). What is a profes- 
for Exercise and Sport, 72(1), 84-90. sion? www.psc.gov.au/what-is-a-profession 

Eagan, K., Stolzenberg, E.B., Bates, A.K., Aragon, M.C., Satell, G. (2010, August 1), What it means to be a pro- 
Suchard, M.R., & Rios-Aguilar, C. (2015). The American fessional. Digital Toronto. www.digitaltonto.com/2010/ 
Sreshman: National norms fall 2015. Higher Education what-it-means-to-be-a-professional/ 
Research Institute, UCLA. 

Schon, D.A. (1995, November/December). Knowing in 
Ericsson, K.A., Prietula, M.J., & Cokely, E.T. (2007). The action: The new scholarship requires a new epistemol- 
making of an expert. Harvard Business Review, 85(7- ogy. Change, 27-34. 
8), 114-121. 

Segar, M.L., Guerin, E., Phillips, E., & Fortier, M. (2016). 
Esmat, T.A., & Pitts, J.D. (2020). Predicting success in From vital sign to vitality: Selling exercise so patients 
an undergraduate exercise science program using want to buy it. Current Sports Medicine Reports, 15(A): 
science-based admissions courses. Advances in Physi- 276-286. 
ology Education, 44(2), 138-144.Etzioni. A. (1969). The Vitali, J.. Blackmore, C., Mortazavi, S., & Anderton, R. 
semi-professions and their organization. Free Press. (2020). Tertiary anatomy and physiology: A barrier 

Feignbaum, E. (2012). Professionalism and workplace for student success. International Journal of Higher 
savvy. The Houston Chronicle. http://smallbusiness. Education, 9(2), 289-296. 
chron.com/professionalism-workplace-savwvy-2909.html 

Friedson, E. (2001). Professionalism: The third logic. Chapter 11 
University of Chicago Press. Ainsworth, B.E., & Hooker, S.P. (2015). The fusion of 

Greenwood, E. (1957). Attributes of a profession. Social public health into kinesiology. Kinesiology Review, 
Work, 2, 45-55. 4(4), 322-328. 

Jackson, J.A. (1970). Professions and professionalization. American Association of Cardiovascular & Pulmonary 
Cambridge University Press. Rehabilitation. (2021). Guidelines for cardiac reha- 

Knudson, D. (2021). Fundamentals of biomechanics (3rd bilitation programs. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics. 

ed.). Springer Science. BerchickeE Re Barnett, J.C.) o. Uptons, RSD 2019): 

Lawson, H.A. (1984). Invitation to physical education. Current Population Reports, P60-267(RV), Health 

Human Kinetics. Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2018. U.S. 
Government Printing Office. 

Lawson, H.A. (1998a, July). Globalization and the social 
responsibilities of citizen-professionals. Address to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016). 

AIESEP International Conference, Adelphi University. Workplace health model. U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services. www.cdc.gov/workplacehealth 

Lawson, H.A. (1998b). Here today, gone tomorrow: A 
promotion/model/index.html 

framework for analyzing the invention, development, 
transformation, and disappearance of helping fields. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. (2019). 

National health expenditure data: Historical. www. 
Quest, 50, 225-237. 

cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statis 
Malek, M.H., Nalbone, D.P., Berger, D.E., & Coburn, 

tics-Trends-and-Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/ 
J.W. (2002). Importance of health science education NationalHealthAccountsHistorical. Accessed on July 
for personal fitness training. Journal of Strength and 8, 2020. 
Conditioning Research, 16(1), 19-24. 

Council on Education for Public Health. (2018). Accred- 
Melville, D.S. & Jones, D.M. (1990). Should physical itation criteria: Standalone baccalaureate programs. 
education majors have their fitness level assessed? https://ceph.org/documents/152/2018.SBPcriteria.pdf 
Journal of Physical Education, Recreation and Dance, 

Chen S., Kuhn, M., Prettner, K., & Bloom, D.E. (2018). 
61(1), 30-32. 

The macroeconomic burden of noncommunicable dis- 
McGuigan, PJ. (2007, February). The ongoing quest 

eases in the United States: Estimates and projections. 
for professionalism: Consumer decision processes for 

PLoS ONE, 13(11), e0206702. https://doi.org/10.1371/ 
professional services. Casualty and Property Insurance journal.pone.0206702 
Underwriters Journal, 60(2), 1-8. 

Commission on Dietetic Registration. (2016). RDN cre- 
Newell, K.M. (1990). Physical activity, knowledge types, dential—Frequently asked questions. www.cdrnet.org/ 
and degree programs. Quest, 42, 243-268. news/rdncredentialfaq 



mE 442 References 

Cowper, P.A., Knight, J.D., Davidson-Ray, L., Peterson, International Health, Racquet & Sportsclub Association. 

E.D., Wang, T.Y., Mark, D.B. on behalf of the TRANS- (2019). IHRSA’s profiles of success. International Health, 

LATE-ACS Investigators. (2019). Acute and 1-Year hos- Racquet & Sportsclub Association. 

pitalization costs for acute myocardial infarction treated Islami, E., Sauer, A.G., Miller, K.D., Siegel, R.., Fedewa, 
with percutaneous coronary intervention: Results from SA., Jacobs, E.J., McCullough, M.L, Patel, A.V., Ma, J, 
the TRANSLATE-ACS registry. Journal of the American Soerjomataram, I., Flanders, W.D., Brawley, O.W., Gap- 
Heart Association, 8, e011322. https://doi.org/10.1161/ stur, S.M., & Jemal, A. (2018). Proportion and number 
JAHA.118.011322 of cancer cases and deaths attributable to potentially 

DeNavas-Walt, C., Proctor, B.D., & Smith, J.C. (2012). modifiable risk factors in the United States. CA: A 

Income, poverty and health insurance coverage in the Cancer Journal for Clinicians, 681) 31-54. 
United States: 2011: Current population reports. U.S. Jenkins, K.R., & Sherman, B.W. (2020). Wellness program 
Census Bureau. nonparticipation and its association with employee 

Dintiman, G.B., & GreenbergJ,.S . (1986). Health through turnover. American Journal of Health Promotion, 

discovery. Random House. 34(5), 559-562. 

Dolbow, D.R., & Figoni, S.F. (2015). Accommodation of Jones, D.S., Podolsky, $.H., & Greene, J.A. (2012). The 
wheelchair-reliant individuals by community fitness burden of disease and the changing task of medicine. 
facilities. Spinal Cord, 53(7), 515-519. New England Journal of Medicine, 30(25), 2333-2338. 

Dychtwald, K. (1990). Age wave. Bantam Books. Kaiser Family Foundation. (2012). Health care costs: A 
primer. http://kff.org/report-section/health-care-costs- 

Fabius, R., Thayer, R.D., Konicki, D.L., Yarborough, C.M., 
Peterson, K.W., Isaac, F,..- Dreger, M. (2013). The link a-primer-2012-report/ 

between workforce health and safety and the health Kaiser Family Foundation. (2019). Empoyer health ben- 
of the bottom line: Tracking market performance of efits: 2019 annual survey. Retrieved from: www.kff. 
companies that nurture a “culture of health.” Journal org/health-costs/report/2019-employer-health-bene 
of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 55(9), fits-survey/ 
993-1000. Linnan, L., Cluff, L., Lang, J.E., Penne, M., & Leff, M.S. (2019). 

Goetzel, R.Z., Anderson, D.R., Whitmer, R.W., Ozmin- Results of the Workplace Health in America survey. Amer- 
kowski, R.J., Dunn, R.L., & Wasserman, J. for The ican Journal of Public Health, 33(5), 652-661. 
Health Enhancement Research Organization (HERO) Mattke S., Liu H., Caloyeras J.P., Huang C.Y., Van Busum 
Research Committee. (1998). The relationship between K.R., Khodyakov D., & Shier V. (2013). Workplace Well- 
modifiable health risks and health care expenditures: ness Programs Study: Final report, RAND Corporation. 
An analysis of the multi-employer HERO health risk www.rand.org/t/RR254 
and cost database. Journal of Occupational and Envi- 

Mattke, S., Liu, H.H., Caloyeras, J.P., Huang, C.Y., Van 
ronmental Medicine, 40.10), 843-854. 

Busum K.R., Khodyakov, D., Shier, V., Exum, E, & Brod- 
Goetzel, R. Z., Fabius, R., Chung Roemer, E., Kent, K. B., erick, M. (2014). Do workplace wellness programs save 
Berko,J .,H ead, M. A., & Mosher Henke, R. (2019). The employers money? RAND Corporation. Retrieved from: 
stock performance of American companies investing www.rand.org/pubs/research_briefs/RB9744.html 
in a culture of health. American Journal of Health 
Promotion, 33(3), 439-447. Merrill, R.M., Aldana, $.G., Pope, J.E., Anderson, D.R., 

Coberley, C.R., Grossmeier, J.J., & Whitmer, R.W. (2013). 
Goetzel, R.Z., Pei, X., Tabrizi, M.J., Henke, R.M., Kowles- Self-rated job performance and absenteeism according 

sar, N., Nelson, C.F., & Metz, R.D. (2012). Ten modifiable to employee engagement, health behaviors, and physi- 
health risk factors are linked to more than one-fifth 

cal health. Journal of Occupational and Environmental 
of employer-employee health care spending. Health Medicine, 55(1), 10-18. 
Affairs, 3111), 2474-2484. 

Niebuhr, S., & Grossmeier, J. (2015). Is it time for a 
Grossmeier, J., Fabius, R., Flynn, J.P., Noeldner, S.P., 

broader approach? Recasting the value of “employee 
Fabius, D., Goetzel, R.Z., & Anderson, D.R. (2016). health” with a focus on workforce capability. American 
Linking workplace health promotion best practices Journal of Health Promotion, 26), TAHP6-9. 
and organizational financial performance: Tracking 
market performance of companies with highest scores O'Donnell, M.P., & Harris, J.S. (1994). Health promotion 

in the workplace. Delmar. 
on the HERO scorecard. Journal of Occupational and 
Environmental Medicine, 58(1), 16-23. Patel, A.V., Friedenreich C.M., Moore, S.C., Hayes, S.C., 

Hannon, P.A., Garson, G., Harris, J.R., Hammerback, K., Silver, J.K., Campbell, K-L., Winters-Stone, K., Gerber, 

Sopher, C.J., & Clegg-Thorp, C. (2012). Workplace health L.H., George, S.M., Fulton, J.E., Denlinger, C., Morris, 

promotion, readiness, and capacity among mid-sized G.S., Hue, T., Schmitz, K.H., & Matthews, C.S. (2019) 

employers in low-wage industries: A national survey. American College of Sports Medicine roundtable report 

Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, on physical activity, sedentary behavior, and cancer 

5411), 1337-1343. prevention and control. Medicine and Science in Sports 
and Exercise, 51(11), 2391-2402. 



References 

Prochaska, J.O., & DiClemente, C.C. (1986). Toward a Chapter 12 
comprehensive model of change. In W. Miller & N. 

Ambrosi, E., & Barker-Schwartz, K. (1995). The profes- 
Heather (Eds.), Treating addictive behaviors (pp. 3-27). 

sion’s image, 1917-1925, part I: Occupational therapy 
Plenum Press. 

as represented in the media. American Journal of 
Tu, H.T., & Mayrell, R.C. (2010). Research brief: Employer Occupational Therapy, 49(7), 715-719. 
wellness initiatives grow, but effectiveness varies widely. 

Bleakley, C.M., Glasgow, P., & MacAuley, D.C. (2012). 
National Institute for Health Care Reform. 

PRICE needs updating, should we call the POLICE? 
U.S. Census Bureau. (2015). American fact finder. U.S. British Journal of Sports Medicine, 46(4), 220-221. 
Department of Commerce. https://factfinder.census. 

Board of Certification (BOC). (2016). Map of state 
gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml 

regulatory agencies. www.bocatc.org/index.php/ 
U.S. Census Bureau. (2020). Age and sex composition in state-regulation 
the United States: 2019. U.S. Department of Commerce. 

Carter, C. (2001). Physician assistant history. Perspective 
www.census.gov/data/tables/2019/demo/age-and- 

on Physician Assistant History, 12(2), 130-132. 
sex/2019-age-sex-compositiohnt.m l 

Erskine, H.E., Whiteford, H.A., & Pike, K.M. (2016). The 
U.S. Census Bureau. (2018). Projected Race and Hispanic 

global burden of eating disorders. Current Opinion in 
Origin: Main Projections Series for the United States, 

Psychiatry, 29(6), 346-353. 
2017-2060. U.S. Census Bureau. www.census.gov/data/ 
tables/2017/demo/popproj/2017-summary-tables. html Greiner, A.C., & Knebel, E. (Eds.). (2003). The core 

competencies needed for health care professions. 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (1996). 

In Health professions education: A bridge to quality. 
Physical activity and health: A report of the surgeon 

National Academies Press. www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ 
general. U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser- 

books/NBK221519/ 
vices, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and King, H., Campbell, S., Herzog, M., Popoli, D., Reisner, A., 

Health Promotion & Polikandriotis, J. (2015). Epidemiology of injuries in 

high school football: Does school size matter? Journal 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2008). 

of Physical Activity and Health, 12(8), 1162-1167. 
Physical activity guidelines for Americans. U.S. Depart- 
ment of Health and Human Services. Knapen, J., Vancampfort, D., Morién, Y., & Marchal, Y. 

(2014). Exercise therapy improves both mental and 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2010). 

physical health in patients with major depression. Dis- 
Healthy People 2020. U.S. Department of Health and 

ability and Rehabilitation, 37(16), 1490-1495. 
Human Services. www.healthypeople.gov. 

Laitman, B.M., & John, G.R. (2015). Understanding how 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2018). 

exercise promotes cognitive integrity in the aging 
Physical Activity Guidelinefso r Americans (2nd ed.). 

brain. PLoS Biology, 13(11), e1002300. https://doi. 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. org/10.1371/journal.p10b0i2o3.00  

Virani S.S., Alonso A., Benjamin E.J., Bittencourt M.S., Lee, A.C.W., & Billings, M. (2016). Telehealth imple- 
Callaway C.W., Carson A.P., Chamberlain ...Tsao C.W., mentation in a skilled nursing facility: Case report for 
American Heart Association Council on Epidemiology physical therapist practice in Washington. Physical 
and Prevention Statistics Committee and Stroke Statis- Therapy, 96(2), 252-259. 
tics Subcommittee. (2020). Heart disease and stroke 

statistics—2020 update: A report from the American Maron, B.J., Haas, T.S., Ahluwalia, A., Murphy, CJ., & 
Garberich, R.F. (2016). Demographics and epidemiol- 

Heart Association, Circulation, 141(9), e€139-e590. 
ogy of sudden deaths in young competitive athletes: 

Welk, G.J., & Knudson, D. (2015). The intersection of From the United States national registry. American 
physical activity and public health: Opportunities for Journal of Medicine, 129(11), 1170-1177. https://doi. 
kinesiology. Kinesiology Review, 4(4), 317-321. org/10.1016/j.amjmed.2016.02.031 

White, J.C., Hartley, S., & Ozminkowski, RJ. (2015). National Athletic Trainers’ Association. (2018). 2018 
Association between corporate wellness program salary survey. https://members.nata.org/members1/ 
participation and changes in health risks. Journal of salarysurvey2018/2018-Salary-Survey-Executive-Sum 
Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 57(10), mary.pdf 
1119-1126. 

Olivares, P.R., Gusi, N., Prieto, J., & Hernandez-Mocholi, 
World Health Organization. (2018). Noncommunicable M.A. (2011). Fitness and health-related quality of life 
diseases. www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/ dimensions in community-dwelling middle aged and 
detail/noncommunicable-diseases older adults. Health and Quality of Life Outcomes, 9, 

YMCA of the USA. (2016). YMCA’s diabetes prevention 117. https://doi.org/10.1186/1477-7525-9-117 
program. www.ymca.net/ diabetes-prevention/. Prentice, W.E. (2015). Principles of athletic training: A 

competency-based approach (15th ed.). McGraw-Hill. 



my 444 References 

Sims, J., Hill, K., Davidson, S., Gunn, J., & Huang, N. approach, McGraw-Hill. 
(2006). Exploring the feasibility of a community-based Davis, K. (2003). Teaching for gender equity in physical 
strength training program for older people with depres- education: A review of the literature. Women in Sport and 
sive symptoms and its impact on depressive symptoms. Physical Activity Journal, 12(2), 55-82. 
BMC Geriatrics, 30(6), 18. 

Degreequery (2020). What is the difference between Praxis I 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). (2020). Occupa- and Praxis IP www.degreequery.com/education-degrees/ 
tional outlook handbook: Athletic trainers. www.bls. what-is-the-difference-between-praxis-i-and-praxis-ii/ 
gov/ooh/healthcare/. 

DeMarco, G.M. (1999). Physical education teachers of the 
Ussher, M.H., Faulkner, G.E.J., Angus, K., Hart- year: Who they are, what they think, say, and do. Teaching 
mann-Boyce, J., & Taylor, A.H. (2019). Exercise inter- Elementary Physical Education, 10(2), 11-13. 
ventions for smoking cessation. Cochrane Database of 

Dodds, P. (1994). Cognitive and behavioral components of 
Systematic Reviews. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858. 

expertise in teaching physical education. Quest, 46(2), 
CD002295.pub6 

153-1063. 
Wardlaw, F.B., McGuire, EA., & Overby, Z. (2000). Ther- 

Donnelly, J.E., Hillman, C.H., Castelli, D., Etnier, J.L., Lee, 
apeutic recreation: Optimal health treatment for ortho- 

S.L., Tomporowski, P., Lambourne, K., & Szabo-Reed, A.N. 
paedic disability. Orthopedic Nursing, 19(4), 56-60. 

(2016). Physical activity, fitness, cognitive function, and 
World Health Organization. (2002). Towards a common academic achievement in children: A systematic review. 
langfour fauncgtioenin g, disability, and health: The Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 48(6), 1197-1222. 
international classification of functioning, disability, 

Dyson, B.P. (1995). Students’ voices in two alternative 
and health. www.who.int/classifications/icf/training/ 

elementary physical education programs. Journal of 
icfbeginnersguidep.d f 

Teaching in Physical Education, 14(4), 394-407. 

EdTPA (2020). EdTPA. www.edtpa.com/PageView.aspx?f= 
Chapter 13 

GEN_About.html 
Anderson, W.G., & Barrette, G.T. (1978). What's going on 

Fink, J., & Siedentop, D. (1989). The development of rou- 
in gym: Descriptive studies of physical education classes 

tines, rules, and expectations at the start of the school year. 
[Monograph #1]. Motor Skills: Theory Into Practice. 

Journal of Teaching in Physical Education, 8(3), 198-212. 
Bangsbo, J., et al. (2016). The Copenhagen Consensus 

Flory, S.B., & McCaughtry, N. (2011). Culturally relevant 
Conference 2016: Children, youth, and physical activity in 

physical education in urban schools: Reflecting cultural 
schools and during leisure time. British Journal of Sports 

knowledge. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 
Medicine, 50.10), 1177-1178. 

82(1), 49-60. 
Berliner, D.C. (1988). The development of expertise in 

Gloria, C., Faulk, K., & Steinhardt, M. (2013). Positive affec- 
pedagogy. American Association of Colleges for Teacher 

tivity predicts successful and unsuccessful adaptations to 
Education. 

stress. Motivation and Emotion, 37, 185-193. 
Brophy, J.E., & Good, T.L. (1986). Teacher behavior and 

Graber, K.C. (2001). Research on teaching in physical 
student achievement. In M.C. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook 

education. In V. Richardson (Ed.), Handbook of research 
of research on teaching (3rd ed., pp. 328-375). Macmillan. 

on teaching (4th ed., pp. 491-519). American Educational 
Carson, R.L., & Webster, C.A. (Eds.). (2020) Comprehensive Research Association. 
school physical activity programs: Putting research into 

Graber, K.C., Killian, C.M., & Woods, A.M. (2020). Quality 
evidence-based practice. Human Kinetics. 

physical education. In R.L. Carson & C.A. Webster (Eds.), 
Castelli, D.M., & Beighle, A. (2007). Rejuvenating the school Comprehensive school physical activity programs: Putting 
environment to include physical activity. Journal of research into evidence-based practice (pp. 89-98). Human 
Physical Education, Recreation and Dance, 78(5), 25-28. Kinetics. 

Castelli, D.M., Centeio E.E., Hwang, J., Barcelona, J.M., Graber, K.C., Locke, L.E, Lambdin, D., & Solmon, M.A. 
Glowacki, E.M., Calvert, H.G., & Nicksic, H.M. (2014). The (2008). The landscape of elementary school physical edu- 
history of physical activity and academic performance 

cation. The Elementary School Journal, 108@Q), 151-159. 
research: Informing the future. Monographs of the Society 
for Research in Child Development, 79,199-148. Graber, K.C., Templin, TJ., Haag, R., & O’Connor, J. (2011). 

Careers in physical education, sport instruction, coaching, 
Cawley, J., Meyerhoefer, C., & Newhouse, D. (2006, Fall). 

sports officiating, and sport psychology. In American 
Not your father’s PE: Obesity, exercise, and the role of 

Kinesiology Association (Ed.), Careers in sport, fitness, 
schools. Education Next, 4(fall), 61-66. 

and exercise (pp. 51-74). Human Kinetics. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2020). Physical Graber, K.C., & Woods, A.M. (2007). Stepping up to the 
activity. www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity/ 

plate: Physical educators as advocates for wellness poli- 
Cooper Institute. (2017). Fitnessgram/activitygram test cies—Part 2. Journal of Physical Education, Recreation 
administration manual (5th ed.). Human Kinetics. and Dance, 78(6), 19-28. 

Corbin, C.B., Welk, G.J., Corbin, W.R., & Welk, K.A. (2019). Graham, G., Holt/Hale, S.A., Parker, M., Hall, T., & Patton, K. 
Concepts off itness and wellness: A comprehensive lifestyle (2020). Children moving: A reflective approach to teaching 



References 445 

physical education (0th ed.). McGraw Hill. McLoughlin, G.M., & Graber, K.C. (2020, preprint). The con- 
Griffin, P.S. (1984). Girls’ participation patterns in a middle tribution of physical education to physical activity within 

school team sports unit. Journal of Teaching in Physical a comprehensive school health promotion program. 
Education, 41), 30-38. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, www.tand 

fonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/02701367.2020.1765952 
Griffin, P.S. (1985). Teachers’ perceptions of and responses 

to sex equity problems in a middle school physical educa- McLoughlin, G.M., Graber, K.C., Woods, A.M., Templin, T., 

tion program. Research Quarterlfyo r Exercise and Sport, Metzler, M., & Khan, N.A. (2020). The status of physical 

56(2), 103-110. education within a nationally recognized school health 
and wellness program. Journal of Teaching in Physical 

Griffin, P.S. (1986). Analysis and discussion: What have we 
Education, 3% 2), 274-283. 

learned? Journal of Physical Education, Recreation and 
Dance, 574), 57-59. Metzler, M. (1979). The measurement of academic learning 

time in physical education [Unpublished doctoral disser- 
Hales, C.M., Carroll, M.D., Fryar, C.D., & Ogden, C.L. (2020). 

tation]. Ohio State University. 
Prevalence of obesity and severe obesity among adults: 
United States, 2017-2018. National Center for Health Metzler, M. (1989). A review of research on time in sport 

Statistics Brief No. 300. www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/data pedagogy. Journal of Teaching in Physical Education, 

briefs/db360.htm*#:~:text=The%20age%2Dadjusted%20 S(2), 87-103. 

prevalence%200f%200besity%20among%20U.S.%20 Metzler, M.W., McKenzie, T.L., van der Mars, H., Bar- 
adults%20was,adults%20aged%2060%20and%20o0ver rett-Williams, S.L., & Ellis, R. (2013a). Health optimizing 

Hellison, D. (2011). Teaching personal and social responsi- physical education (HOPE): A new curriculum for school 

bility through physical activity (3rd ed.). Human Kinetics. programs—Part 1: Establishing the need and describing 
the model. Journal of Physical Education, Recreation & 

Hills, A., Dengel, D., & Lubans, D. (2015). Supporting public 
Dance, 844): 41-47. 

health priorities: Recommendations for physical education 
and physical activity promotion in schools. Progress in Metzler, M.W., McKenzie, T.L., van der Mars, H., Barrett-Wil- 

Cardiovascular Diseases. 57(4), 368-374. liams, S.L., & Ellis, R. (2013b). Health optimizing physical 
education (HOPE): A new curriculum for school programs 

Howie, E.K., & Pate, R.R. (2012). Physical activity and aca- 
— Part 2: Teacher knowledge and collaboration. Journal 

demic achievement in children: A historical perspective. 
of Physical Education, Recreation & Dance, 84(5), 25-34. 

Journal of Sport and Health Science, 1(3), 160-169. 
Mitchell, S.A., Oslin, J.L., & Griffin, L.L. (2013). Teaching 

Hylton, K. (2015). ‘Race’ talk! Tensions and contradictions 
sport concepts and skills (3rd ed.). Human Kinetics. 

in sport and PE (2015). Physical Education and Sport 
Pedagogy, 20(5), 503-5106. Ogden, C.L., Carroll, M.D., Fryar, C.D., & Flegal, K.M. (2015). 

Prevalence of obesity among adults and youth: United 
Institute of Medicine. (2013). Educating the student body: 

States, 2011-2014. NCHS Data Brief No. 219. www.cdc. 
Taking physical activity and physical education to school. 

gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db219.pdf 
The National Academies Press. 

O’Sullivan, M. (2004). Possibilities and pitfalls of a public 
Konukman, F., Agbuga, B., Erdogan, S., Zorba, E, Demir- 

health agenda for physical education. Journal of Teaching 
han, G., & Yilmaz, I. (2010). Teacher-coach role conflict 

in Physical Education, 23(4), 392-404. 
in school-based physical education in USA: A literature 
review and suggestions for the future. Biomedical Human Parkes, C., & Weimer, A. (2020). Dual-pathway PETE/PHETE 

Kinetics, 2(1), 19-24. majors: The future of our profession? Journal of Physical 
Education, Recreation & Dance, 91(6), 21-29. 

Lanier, J.E., & Little, J.W. (1986). Research on teacher edu- 
cation. In M.C. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook of research on Pate, R.R., O’Neill, J.R., & McIver, K.L. (2011). Physical 

teaching (3rd ed., pp. 527-569). Macmillan. activity and health: Does physical education matter? 
Quest, 63(1), 19-35. 

Lau, E.Y., Wandersman, A.H., & Pate, R.R. (2016). Factors 
influencing implementation of youth physical activity Rasberry, C.N., Lee, S.M., Robin, L., Laris, B.A., Russell, 

interventions: An expert perspective. Translational L.A., Coyle, K.K., & Nihiser, A.J. (2011). The associa- 

Journal of the American College of Sports Medicine, 1(7), tion between school-based physical activity, including 
physical education, and academic performance: A sys- 

60-70. doi:10.2379-2868/0107/60-70 
tematic review of the literature. Preventive Medicine 

Lortie, D. (1975). Schoolteacher: A sociological study. Uni- 
52(S1), $10-20. 

versity of Chicago Press. 
Richards, K., Levesque-Bristol, C., Templin, T.J., & Graber, 

Maslach, C., & Jackson, S. (1986). Maslach burnout inven- 
K.C. (2016). The impact of resilience on role stressors 

tory: Manual (2nd ed.). Consulting Psychologists Press. 
and burnout in elementary and secondary teachers. 

McKenzie, T.L., & Lounsbery, M.A.F. (2009). School phys- Social Psychology of Education. 19, 511-536. 
ical education: The pill not taken. American Journal of Richards, K., Templin, T., Levesque-Bristol, C., & Blan- 
Lifestyle Medicine, 3), 219-225. kenship, B. (2014). Understanding differences in role 

McKenzie, T.L., & Lounsbery, M.F. (2013). Physical education stressors, resilience, and burnout in teacher/coaches 

teacher effectiveness in a public health context. Research and non-coaching teachers. Journal of Teaching in 
Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 84(A), 419-430. Physical Education, 33(3), 383-402. 



M446 References 

Rink, J.E. (2006). Teaching physical educatiofnor  learn- Chapter 14 
ing (5th ed.). McGraw-Hill. Barnett, Z. (2015). 2015-2016 coaching changes. Foot- 

Sallis, J.F., & McKenzie, T.L. (1991). Physical education’s ballScoop. http://footballscoop.com/news/2015-16- 
role in public health. Research Quarterly for Exercise head-coaching-changes/ 
and Sport, 62(2), 124-137. Boys & Girls Clubs of America. (2018). Annual report. 

Sallis, J.R, McKenzie, T.L., Beets, M.W., Beighle, A., Erwin, www.bgca.org/ 
H., & Lee, S. (2012). Physical education’s role in public DeMarco, G.M. (1999). Physical education teachers of 
health: Steps forward and backward over 20 years and the year: Who they are, what they think, say, and do. 
HOPE for the future. Research Quarterly for Exercise Teaching Elementary Physical Education, 10(2): 11-13. 
and Sport, 83(2), 125-135. 

Ewing, M.E., & Seefeldt, V. (1989). Participation and 
Siedentop, D., Hastie, P., & van der Mars, H. (2011). Com- attrition patterns in American agency-sponsored and 
plete guide to sport education (2nd ed.). Human Kinetics, interscholastic sports: An executive summary [Final 

Society of Health and Physical Educators. (2014). report to U.S. Footwear Association]. Institute for 
National standards & grade-level outcomes for K-12 Youth Sports. 
physical education. Human Kinetics. Hellison, D., Cutforth, N., Kallusky, J., Martinek, T., 

Society of Health and Physical Educators. (2015). The Parker, M., & Stiehl, J. (2000). Serving underserved 
essential components of physical education. www. youth through physical activity: Linking universities 
shapeamerica.org/uploads/pdfs/TheEssentialCompo and communities. Human Kinetics. 
nentsOfPhysicalEducation.pdf National Collegiate Athletic Association. (2020). Esti- 

Society of Health and Physical Educators. (n.d.). Com- mated probability of competing in college athletics. 
prehensive school physical activity program. www. www.ncaa.org/about/resources/research/estimat 
shapeamerica.org/cspap/what.cfm ed-probability-competing-college-athletics 

Society of Health and Physical Educators. (2017). National Collegiate Athletic Association (2019). NCAA 
National standards and guidelines for physical edu- 2018-19 sports sponsorship and participation rates 
cation teacher education (4th ed.). SHAPE America. report. https://ncaaorg.s3.amazonaws.com/research/ 

Society of Health and Physical Educators. (2019). PE sportpart/2018-19RES_SportsSponsorshipParticipa 

metrics (3rd ed.). Human Kinetics. tionRatesReport.pdf 

Society of Health and Physical Educators and American National Federation of State High School Associations. 

Heart Association. (2016). Shape of the nation. www. (2019). 2018-19 high school athletics participation 

shapeamerica.org/advocacy/son/2016/upload/Shape- survey. www.nths.org/media/1020412/2018-19_par 
of-the-Nation-2016_web.pdf ticipation_survey.pdf 

Staurowsky, E., Hogshed-Makar, N., Kane, M., Wughalter, Payscale. (2017). Strength and conditioning coach salary. 
E., Yiamouyiannis, A., & Lerner, P. (2007). Gender equity www.payscale.com/research/US/Job=Strength_and_ 
in physical education and athletics. In S. Klein (Ed.), Conditioning _Coach/Salary 

Handbook for achieving sex equity through education Sports coach [Job profile]. (2020). U.S. News & World 
(pp. 381-410). Routledge. Report. http://money.usnews.com/careers/best-jobs/ 

Stroot, S. (1996). Organizational socialization: Factors sports-coach 

impacting beginning teachers. In S.J. Silverman & C.D. USA Today. (2020a). NCAAB salaries. http://sports.usato 
Ennis (Eds.) Student learning in physical education day.com/ncaa/salaries/mens-basketball/coach/ 
(pp. 339-365).vHuman Kinetics. 

USA Today. (2020b). 2020 NCAA football head coach 
Stroot, S.A., & Oslin, J.L. (1993). Use of instructional salaries methodology. https://sports.usatoday. 
statements by preservice teachers for overhand throw- com/2020/10/07/2020-ncaa-football-head-coach-sala 
ing performance of children. Journal of Teaching in ries-methodology/ 
Physical Education, 13(1), 24-45. 

USA Today (2020c). NCAA salaries. https:// 
Tyson, L. (1996). Context of schools. In S. Silverman & C. sports.usatoday.com/2020/10/07/2020-ncaa-foot 
Ennis (Eds.), Studying learning in physical education: ball-head-coach-salaries-methodology/ 
Applying research to enhance instruction (pp. 55-80). 

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2015). Occupational 
Human Kinetics. 

outlook handbook: Coaches and scouts. www.bls.gov/ 
U. S. Department of Health and Human Services and ooh/entertainment-and-sports/coaches-and-scouts.htm. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016). 

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2019). Coaches 
Results from the school health policies and practices and 

scouts. www.bls.gov/ooh/entertainment-and-sports/ 
study (SHPPS). www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/data/ 

coaches-and-scoutsht.m  
shpps/index.htm 

Ziprecruiter (2021). Sports analytics salary. 
Woods, A.M., & Graber, K.C. (Eds.). (2007). Stepping https://www. 

ziprecruiter.com/Salaries/
up to the plate: Physical educators as advocates for Sports-Analytics-Salary 

wellness policies—Part I [Special feature]. Journal of 
Physical Education, Recreation & Dance, 78(5), 17-28. 



References 447 

Chapter 15 miamitimesonline.com/news/are-you-ready-for-that- 
Badenhausen, K. (2011, December 14). The NFL signs TV work-at-the-big-game/article_7b8c7 1de-f021-11e9-8cc6- 
deal worth $27 billion. Forbes/Business. www.forbes. 03512828e904.html 
com/sites/kurtbadenhausen/2011/12/1 4/the-nfl-signs- Heinze, K.L., Soderstrom, S., & Zdroik,J .( 2014). Toward 
tv-deals-worth-26-billion/#540e6e162a67 a strategic and authentic corporate social responsibility 

Billsberry,J .,M ueller, J., Skinner, J., Swanson, S., Corbett, in professional sport: A case study of the Detroit Lions. 
 

B., & Ferkins, L. (2018). Reimagining leadership in sport Journal of Sport Management, 28(6), 672-686. 

management: Lessons from the social construction of Hoang, T.V., Cardinal, B.J., & Newhart, D.W. (2016). 
leadership. Journal of Sport Management, 32(2), 170- An exploratory study of ethnic minority students’ 
182. https://doi.org/10.1123/jsm.2017-0210. constraints to and facilitators of engaging in campus 

Bruening, J., Fuller, R.D., Catrufo, RJ., Madsen recreation. Recreational Sports Journal, 40(1), 69-82. 
, R.M., 

Evanovich, J., & Wilson-Hill, D.E. (2014). Applying Howard, D.R., & Crompton, J.L. (2014). Financing sport 
intergroup contact theory to the sport management (3rd ed.). Fitness Information Technology. 
classroom, Sport Management Education Journal, Humphreys, B.R. (2019). Should the construction of new 
8(1), 35-40. professional sports facilities be subsidized? Journal 

Canadian Sport Tourism Alliance. (n.d.), About CSTA. http:// of Policy Analysis and Management, 381), 264-270. 
canadiansporttourism.com/about-csta/about-csta. html https://prdoxyo. iwi-choitra.ged.u/1 0.1002/pam.22099 

Chelladurai, P. (2006). Human resource management in Hurd, A.R., & Anderson, D.M. (2011). The park and 
sport and recreation (2nd ed.). Human Kinetics. recreation professional’s handbook. Human Kinetics. 

Collins, L., & Collins, D. (2013). Decision making and IBISWorld. (2020, June). Sporting good stores industry 
risk management in Adventure Sports coaching. Quest, in the US—market research report. www.ibisworld. 
65(1), 72-83. com/united-states/market-research-reports/sport- 

College Football Playoff. (n.d.). Sponsors. https://college ing-goods-stores-industry/ 

footballplayoff.com/sports/2017/12/20/sponsors.aspx IHRSA (international Health, Racquet & Sportsclub 

Commission on Sport Management Accreditation Association). (2020, June 26). The 2020 IHRSA Global 

(COSMA). (2016, May). Accreditation principles Report: Clubs post record number in 2019. www.ihrsa. 

manual & guidelinefsor  self-study preparation. www. org/about/media-center/press-releases/the-2020-ihrsa- 

global-report-clubs-post-record-numbers-in-2019/ 
cosmaweb.org/accreditation-manuals.html 

Irwin, R.L., Sutton, W.A., & McCarthy, L.M. (2008). Sport pro- 
Deitsch, R. (2011, December 15). NFL, networks win in 

motion and sales management (2nd ed.). Human Kinetics. 
extended rights deal. Sports Illustrated. www.si.com/ 
nfl/2011/12/15/nfl-rightsdeal Kihl, L. Gin press). Cultivating positive relationships in 

the community. In G.C. Stoldt, S.W. Dittmore, M. Ross, 
Deloitte. (2020a). 2020 sports industry outlook. Deloitte 

& S.E. Branvold. Sport public relations (3rd ed., pp. 
Center for Technology, Media & Telecommunications. 

185-200). Human Kinetics. 
www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/Docu 

ments/technology-media-telecommunications/us-tmt- Krnjaic, J. (2020). The impact of the Covid crisis on the 

sports-outlook-2020.pdf sport industry. Marbella International University Centre 
(MIUC). Retrieved from https://miuc.org/impact-covid- 

Deloitte. (2020b). COVID-19 outlook for the sports industry. 
crisis-sport-industry/. 

Deloitte Center for Technology, Media & Telecommu- 
nications. www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/ Ledesma, M. (2020, June 11). Cornhole & other non-tradi- 

us/Documents/technology-media-telecommunications/ tional sports get off the bench & reach new audiences. 

us-covid-19-outlook-us-sports-sector-may-2020.pdf Digital Marketing News. Retrieved from https://insights. 
digitalmediasolutions.com/articles/non-tradition 

Fielding, L.W., & Miller, L.K. (1996). Historical eras in 
al-sports-marketing 

sport marketing. In B.G. Pitts & D.K. Stotlar (Eds.), 
Fundamentals of sport marketing (pp. 41-74). Fitness Live It Miami. (n.d.). Meet the team. Retrieved from www. 

Information Technology. miasbliv.com/committee/ 

Ganim, S. (2015, August 12). NCAA punishment is any- Lombardo, J., & Mullen, L. (2018, July 30). Gain- 

one’s guess. CNN.com. www.cnn.com/2015/08/12/us/ ing momentum. Street & Smith’s Sports Business 

ncaa-academic-fraud/ Journal. www.sportsbusinessdaily.com/Journal/ 
Issues/2018/07/30/In-Depth.aspx 

Gibson, H., & Fairley, S. (2014). Sport tourism. In P.M. 

Pedersen & L. Thibault (Eds.), Contemporary sport MacIntosh, E.W., & Burton, L.J. (2019). Organizational 

management (5th ed., pp. 204-288). Human Kinetics. behavior in sport management. Human Kinetics. 

Meek, A. (1997). An estimate of the size and supported 
Gough, C. (2020). Esports audience size worldwide 

from 2018 to 2023, by type of viewers. Statista. www. economic activity of the sports industry in the United 
States. Sport Marketing Quarterly, 0(4), 15-22. 

statista.com/statistics/490480/global-esports-audi 

ence-size-viewer-type/ Miller, L.K. (1997). Sport business management. Aspen. 

Gutzmore, C. (2019, October 16). Are you ready for Mullin, B.J., Hardy, S., & Sutton, W.A. (2014). Sport mar- 

that work at the Big Game? The Miami Times. www. keting (4th ed.). Human Kinetics. 



Mm 448 References 

National Center for Spectator Sports Safety and Security. Sherman, A. (2020, February 23). Here’s how NFL TV 

(2017). About. https://ncs4.usm.edu/aboutncs4 rights are expected to shake out for the rest of the 
decade, according to sources. CNBC. www.cnbc. 

National Collegiate Athletic Association. (n.d.). LSDBi. 
com/2020/02/22/nfl-tv-rights-up-for-renewal-in-2022- 

https://web3.ncaa.org/Isdbi/search?types=major&q= 
and-big-media-will-pay-more.html 

National Collegiate Athletic Association, (2005, February 
Sports Events & Tourism Association. (2019, May 10). 

25). Commitment to diversity programming. NCAA 
National Association of Sports Commissions announces 

News, 42(5), A2. 
new brand at symposium. www.globenewswire. 

Nielsen Sports. (2018). Top 5 global sport industry com/news-release/2019/05/10/1821965/0/en/Nation 
trends. www.nielsen.com/wp-content/uploads/ al-Association-of-Sports-Commissions-announc- 
sites/3/2019/04/Nielsen_Top5_Commercial_ es-new-brand-at-annual-symposium.html 
Trends_2018.pdf 

Stoldt, G.C., Dittmore, $.W., & Branvold, S.E. (2012). Sport 
North American Society for Sport Management. (n.d.). public relations (2nd ed.). Human Kinetics. 
Sport management programs. www.nassm.com/Pro 
grams/AcademicPrograms Stoldt, G.C., Dittmore, S.W., & Pedersen, P.M. (2014). 

Communication in the sport industry. In P.M. Pedersen 
NSGA (National Sporting Goods Association). (2019, 

& L. Thibault (Eds.), Contemporary sport management 
May 19). NSGA’s Sporting Goods Market Report shows 

(Sth ed., pp. 338-359). Human Kinetics. 
retail sales reach $69.9 billion. www.nsga.org/news/ 
news-releases/association-news-archives/nsga-releases- The Y. (2020a). Facts and figures. www.ymca.net/orga 

2019-sporting-goods-market-report/ nizational-profile 

NSMA (National Sports Media Association). (2020, April The Y. (2020b). Global services. www.ymca.net/glob 

21). NSGA Sports Participation Study shows growth al-services 

in 2019. https://nationalsportsmedia.org/news/nsga- University of Florida. (2020). Undergraduate cat- 
sports-participation-study-shows-growth-in-2019 alog 2020-21. https://catalog.ufl.edu/UGRD/col 

Pitts, B.G., & Stotlar, D.K. (2007). Fundamentals of sport leges-schools/UGHHU/TRM_BSTM/#academiclearn 

marketing (3rd ed.). Fitness Information Technology. ingcompacttext 

Plunkett Research (n.d.-a). Estimated Size of the University of Minnesota. (2020). University catalogs. 

Entire Sports Industry, U.S. 2008-2018. www.plun- https://onestop2.umn.edu/pcas/viewCatalogProgram. 

kettresearch.com/statistics/Industry-Statistics-Estimat do?programID=299 

ed-Size-Of-The-Entire-Sports-Industry-US-2008-2018/ U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics 

Plunkett Research (n.d.-b). Sports Industry Employ- (2019a, May). May 2019 National Industry-Specific 

ment by Business Type, U.S.: 2015-2019 www.plun- Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates. NAICS 

kettresearch.com/statistics/Industry-Statistics-Sports-In 711200 - Spectator Sports. www.bls.gov/oes/current/ 

dustry-Employment-By-Business-Type-US-2015-2019/ naics4_711200.htm 

Portero, A. (2020, January 21). Super Bowl LIV expected U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics 

to be an economic windfall for region. South Florida (2019b, May). May 2019 National Industry-Specific 

Business Journal. www.bizjournals.com/southflorida/ Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates. NAICS 

news/2020/01/21/super-bowl-liv-expected-to-be-an- 713940 - Fitness and Recreational Sports Centers. www. 

economic-windfall.html bls.gov/oes/current/naics5_713940.htm#39-0000 

Quinn, G. (2014, April 21). One year after bombing, Vianden, J., & Gregg, E.A. (2017). What's my responsi- 

some are critical of new security measures at Boston bility? Undergraduate heterosexual white men in sport 

Marathon. MassLive. www.masslive.com/news/boston/ management discuss increasing diversity in sport. Sport 

index.ssf/2014/04/security_at_the_boston_maratho. Management Education Journal, 11(2), 88-101. https:// 

html. doi.org/10.1123/smej.2015-0023 

Reyes, M.S. (2019, December 18). Esports ecosystem Walker, M., & Parent, M.M. (2010). Communicating 

report 2020: The key industry players and trends grow- socially responsible initiatives: An analysis of US profes- 

ing the esports market which in on track to surpass sional teams. Sport Marketing Quarterly, 194), 187-195. 

$1.5B by 2023. Business Insider. www.businessinsider, Weerakoon, R.K. (2016). Human resource management in 
com/esports-ecosystem-market-report sports: A critical review of its importance and pertaining 

Rich, K., & Giles, A. (2015). Managing diversity to provide issues. Physical Culture & Sport. Studies & Research, 

culturally safe sport programming: A case study of the 69(1), 15-22. 

Canadian Red Cross’s swim program. Journal of Sport Wichita State University. (2020). Undergraduate catalog 
Management, 2%3), 305-318. 2020-21. http://catalog.wichita.edu/undergraduate/ 

Shank, M.D., & Lyberger, M.R. (2015). Sports marketing: courses/smegt/ 

A strategic perspective (Sth ed.). Routledge. Zheng, J. (2018). Interview with Rong (DanDan) Hua, 

Sharp, L.A., Moorman, A.M., & Claussen, C.L. (2010). digital media manager of the National Football League’s 
Sport law: A managerial approach (2nd ed.). Holcomb China office. International Journal of Sport Communi- 
Hathaway. cation, 11(3), 301-307. 



Note: The italicized f and ¢ following page numbers refer to figures 
and tables, respectively. 

A age tion (APTA) 99, 326 
AAAPE (American Association for bone strength and 214 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) 

the Advancement of Physical cardiovascular endurance 236 282 

Education) 94 demographic trends 300-301, anabolic steroids 254 
AAHPERD (American Alliance for 300f anaerobic energy systems 228 

Health, Physical Education, growth charts 166, 166f ancient Greeks 30, 88, 365 
Recreation and Dance) 16 injuries and 24 anemia 235 

AASP (Association of Applied Sport maximal oxygen uptake 231, 236 animal models 226 
Psychology) 176 motor development 140, 145, anxiety 

academic kinesiology 15 164-168, 166f, 167 arousal and 185-187, 186f 191- 
academic learning time 339 neuromuscular changes 164 IOP, WO 
academic performance 343-344 overhand throwing 166-168, exercise and 182, 384 

accelerometers 35, 207f 227, 238 166f, 167f measurement of 177, 179 
accounting 397f 400, 403 physical fitness and 236 in sport 180, 182, 184 
accreditation 107, 295, 408-410 self-sufficiency and 24 APA citation format 18, 43 

ACE (American Council on Exercise) aggression 181 Applied Exercise and Health 

289, 292, 296 AHA (American Historical Associa- dual-pathway program 351 

achievement, value of 68, 71 tion) 84 applied sport psychology 176 
ACL (anterior cruciate ligament) AKA (American Kinesiology Associ- apprentices 257, 263, 331 

injuries 201-202, 314 ation) 10, 11, 15, 261-262 APTA (American Physical Therapy 

ACSM (American College of Sports alcohol 283, 285, 313, 405 Association) 99, 326 

Medicine) 255, 284, 292, 296, All-American Girls Professional arousal 185-187, 186f 191-192, 192f 
323 Baseball League 95 association/dissociation 191 

action-reaction forces 212-213, 212f allied fields 15-16 Association of Applied Sport Psy- 

activities of daily living (ADLs) 24, ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) chology (AASP) 176 
Alee2dd- 2025 31353186 282 asthma 312 

adapted physical education 357-358 Alzheimer’s disease 221 athletic directors 130¢, 131, 138, 

adjustable desks 26 AMA (American Medical Associa- 249-250, 381 

administrator positions 379, 395, tion) 289, 302, 318 athletic therapists (Canada) 322. See 

400, 404 AMA citation format 18, 43 also athletic trainers 

adults. See also older populations ambient vision 163 athletic trainers 

coaching for 374 American Alliance for Health, Physi- Canadian 322 

development in 164-165, 160f cal Education, Recreation and clinics 315, 316-317, 322 

exercise recommendations 235- Dance (AAHPERD) 16 duties and education 309, 3182, 

236; 275 American Association for the 321-322 

heart rate 231 Advancement of Physical Edu- in history 98, 106-107 

instruction in sport and exercise cation (AAAPE) 94 motor learning and 147 

28-29, 183 American College of Sports Medi- opportunities for 322-323 

in outdoor recreation 103 cine (ACSM) 255, 284, 292, requirements for 290, 291 

participation by 100-101, 106, 296, 323 settings for 322 
American Council on Exercise (ACE) 

136, 239 attentional focus 191-192, 192f 

adventure education 343 289, 292, 296 193-194 
American Historical Association 

advertising 280-281, 395, 397, 405 attitudes 256, 264-266 

aerobic endurance 230-231 (AHA) 84 attributions of failure 139 
American Indians 89-90, 134 

aesthetics 11, 71, 126 Augie’s Quest to Cure ALS 282 
American Kinesiology Association augmented feedback 149, 155, 159- 

mnaet We 
(AKA) 10, 11, 15, 261-262 160 

Affordable Care Act of 2010 279, 
American Medical Association 

289,301 automatic responses 163 
(AMA) 289, 302, 318 autonomy 184 

African Americans. See Black athletes; 
American Physical Therapy Associa- 

racial and ethnic relations axiology 54-55 

449 